

THE DAKAR CHALLENGE ROADBOOK






[BEFORE YOU SET OFF ON THE CHALLENGE, IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO CHECK THE ENTRY REQUIREMENTS FOR EACH COUNTRY – PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO COVID REQUIREMENTS.  YOU MAY NEED TESTS AT BORDERS]








Edition: Edited 04. INC-EVISA  FOR JANUARY 2026 RUN  


CONTENTS
The Schedule for THE Challenge	5
IMPORTANT CONTACTS	7
Roadbook Structure	8
introduction	8
The RoadBook Part 1	9
1.	PREPARATION AND AWARENESS	9
1.1.	VISAS	9
1.2.	MAPPING APPS AND NAVIGATION	9
1.3.	PERSONAL HEALTH	9
1.4.	TRAVEL INSURANCE	10
1.5.	PERSONAL INFORMATION SHEETS	10
1.6.	MONEY	10
1.7.	PREPARING YOUR CAR	11
1.8.	ITEMS TO TAKE WITH YOU	11
1.9.	CAR PAPERWORK FOR NON BRITISH NATIONALS	15
1.10.	CAR INSURANCE	16
1.11.	VEHICLE OWNERSHIP DOCUMENTS (V5 IN UK)	16
1.12.	TAX AND MOT	16
1.13.	VANS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES	16
1.14.	KEEPING IN TOUCH	17
1.15.	RESPECTING LOCAL CULTURE	18
1.16.	DRIVING IN AFRICA	19
1.17.	DEALING WITH OFFICIALS	19
1.18.	AVOIDING FINES	20
1.19.	FUEL	21
1.20.	WATER	21
1.21.	DRIVING IN SAND	21
1.22.	TEAM PLAYERS	21
1.23.	RISK	22
1.24.	USEFUL RESOURCES	22
1.25.	SHOPPING HOURS	23
The Road Book Part 2	24
2.	PLYMOUTH TO NOUAKCOTT	24
2.1.	Possible routes to Morocco	24
2.2.	DRIVE THROUGH FRANCE	24
2.3.	DRIVE THROUGH SPAIN	24
2.4.	FERRY TO BILBAO	24
2.5.	GETTING TO SOUTHERN SPAIN	24
2.6.	TARIFA	24
2.7.	GIBRALTAR	25
2.8.	FERRY TICKETS TO MOROCCO	25
2.9.	IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES	25
2.10.	TEMPORARY VEHICLE IMPORTATION	26
2.11.	CAR INSURANCE	26
2.12.	THE ROUTE SOUTH	26
2.13.	MARRAKECH or FES	27
2.14.	ESSAOUIRA	27
2.15.	AGADIR	27
2.16.	TAROUDANT	28
2.17.	LAÂYOUNE	28
2.18.	TIZNIT	28
2.19.	SIDI IFNI	29
2.20.	INTO WESTERN SAHARA	29
2.21.	ROAD TO DAKHLA	29
2.22.	DAKHLA	29
2.23.	INTO MAURITANIA	29
2.24.	MAURITANIAN OFF ROAD	30
2.25.	DESERT FOR REAL (or Road Route)	31
2.26.	NOUAKCHOTT	32
2.27.	ONWARD JOURNEY OR HOME FROM HERE	32
THE ROADBOOK Part 3	33
3.	NOUAKCHOTT TO BANJUL, THE GAMBIA	33
3.1.	TO ZEBRABAR	33
3.2.	INTO SENEGAL	33
3.3.	ZEBRABAR / SAINT LOUIS	34
3.4.	TO THE GAMBIA	35
3.5.	THE RUN FOR THE BORDER (Well, an overnight stop just before it).	35
3.6.	OVERNIGHT STOP	35
3.7.	BORDER CROSSING	35
3.8.	WELCOME TO BANJUL!	36
3.9.	LEGS FOR AFRICA	37
3.10.	LEAVING YOUR CAR	37
3.11.	COMING HOME	37
FICHE	………………………………………………………………………………………………….38


The Schedule for THE Challenge
CONGRATULATIONS ON YOUR great decision to get out there anD see the world on a shoestring before it gets covered in tarmac or the computers say no. REALLY PLEASED to have you on board. you are now part of an exclusive group of lunatics PREPARING TO BOLDLY GO over 4400 miles VIA MOUNTAINS AND DESERTS IN AN OLD SHOPPING CAR WITH THE FINAL DESTINATION OF the Gambia. WHAT COULD POSSIBLY GO WRONG?
BELOW IS A BREAKDOWN OF WHAT TO EXPECT. I have not listed my 1000’s of amazing photographs, hours of awesome videos and a step-by-step itinerary of my every move as, well, this would be a carbon copy of my adventure. I would love for you to have as much fun as I do, and I really hope you will. But this has to be your adventure and personal experience. I would love to hear all about it once you have made it to the end with all the bits I have completely missed. So bon voyage my fellow travellers of the world. Have a great trip.
If this is your first go of shoestring travel, I am envious of that initial feeling of not knowing what’s ahead. Don’t be disappointed by the lists of bewares. This is in order for you not to go into things blind. The well-travelled will take this as a bonus. Whilst we might know things, we clearly don’t know everything and I am always pleased of advice. The world of travel is a wonderful place with many inquisitive people. Don’t fear them but embrace the fleeting moment of different cultures. We all come back better, well-grounded more wholesome people with life changing stories to tell.
What is the Dakar Challenge?
The Dakar Challenge is a group of like-minded people all driving in the same direction looking out for each other. Hopefully buddying up to make the journey a memorable experience of a lifetime. Sharing moments in far out places you would never have thought about travelling to in your old shopping car. Magnificent terrain with breath taking views and sunsets. Interesting and odd food, Quirky car moments with random things on and in the road. Inquisitive people with lovely memories. All packed into a 21 day timeframe with very humble and grateful end user charities who will benefit immensely from all your hard work and efforts. For this we thank you most graciously in advance for taking part.
To avoid any doubt. This is an international event for ages 17+. You start from wherever you live. You do not need to drive to England. All teams meet at Tarifa Spain if not before.
I would like to say this is a group event as you will get a greater experience from it. You can go it alone, but it would be very difficult without the paperwork. So, I wouldn’t advise it and it kinda defeats the whole idea of this run. Togetherness is our strength especially in times of need. In the most extreme circumstances that do happen. Say your car needs towing or you may be required to tow a car, this is impossible if you are alone. Being a team player is the most essential part of the Dakar Challenge. If you are not then it’s probably best you don’t sign up. The rewards of togetherness are endless. Not just great photos of each other on the road but evenings sat together in the star lit desert sipping on smuggled booze. Moments that you the lucky few actually get to experience.
In order to know how to achieve daily mileage targets you will be sent a suggested dates itinerary. This gives you an outlined plan and places to help you from falling too far behind. 

There are effectively 5 main meet up points.
 (Optional) Hotel Meson de Sancho in Tarifa for a shit shirts at the bar / car park meet up. (Obligatory)The Barbas Hotel just before the Mauritanian border. 
(Obligatory) Out front of the American Embassy in Mauritania, 
(Obligatory)The Diama border exiting Mauritania into Senegal. 
(Obligatory) Finally the Gambian border. 

You are free to cut your own path through Europe and as far as the Hotel Barbas if you wish (just before the border of Mauritania) though doing it with others is far more entertaining. From the Hotel Barbas in Bir Gandouz Morocco onwards it gets a bit trickier. So, it would be advisable to heed the advice given. Also, at certain points you will find it far more difficult without the paperwork we have spent decades ironing out. But anyway, moving on.  Many choose to meet up in their home countries and buddy up for the journey to Tarifa in Spain. This is a truly international event so driving to England is not required. Tarifa Spain at the Meson De Sancho hotel is where we have our first official meet up point for Shit shirts night. A great place to mingle with other participants, walk round the car park and gaze in amazement that these wonderful vehicles made it this far. But before that, when setting off find out via WhatsApp who is leaving from which ferry port and when. Aim to leave at the same time if possible.  I am truly grateful for those I have met up with at the UK ferry ports as in previous years within 10 miles into France my vehicle died. It continued to fail multiple times down through France and Spain. We limped it to the hotel in Tarifa where those with mechanical knowledge fixed it. I really would have been stranded without those with me for moral support during these moments and of course the ever-handy Germans who fixed my vehicle in the car park with limited tools. This will be the first time your old shopping car will take a hammering miles wise. These are long days. I went on to buddy up with these guys all the way till the end. Great times were had by all. Now lifelong friends. 
From Hotel Barbas onwards all team’s information has been forwarded to assist easing at the borders. Your documents have been sent to the Mauritanian, Senegalese and Gambian border officials in order to pass as a group. Please make every effort to be at the specific place on the specific dates and make sure from the outset the information you have provided is correct. There is a self-service check in section for you to fill out on the member’s page.
You will have been invited upon receipt of your application form to the Members only Dakar challenge Facebook page. Much will be discussed on the page. Though with the recent introduction of the members only WhatsApp group chat much gets chatted about on there and then buried in the daily chat, for this reason important information will still be posted to the Facebook page. I will expand on the borders, anticipated costs and formalities later in this road book.  
Make sure you read and respond to the pinned articles on the Dakar chat page. These will be the important things done behind the scenes to make your trip easier and enjoyable. Facebook and WhatsApp are a necessary evil in this day and age. Please make sure that at least 1 person in your car is connected.
If you have a question, then the chances are others might be thinking the same thing too. Pop onto the Facebook or WhatsApp chat page and either Dave or previous Dakarists (on the Facebook page) may well give you the answer you are looking for.
Travelling with the group means certain parts will be pre-arranged by Dave on behalf of the group. So, the contacts Dahid in Mauritania, Moulaye in Senegal and Sam in The Gambia are included in the document below. With Dave & Elaine joining up the dots.
 When you get to Spain and meet other participants you may want to hook up to form groups of 4-5 cars or more.  Most people decide in their group where to go each day and the groups change according to what each team decide to do – you merge with other teams, hook up with new groups, etc along the way. Again, with the introduction of WhatsApp may decide and plan their routes way in advance and on which sections to buddy up with whom or swing from one group to another depending on your driving speeds and overnight locations. 
The Tarifa hotel is your first real chance to meet up with other teams so don’t miss that (Shit shirts night!).  It is also highly important that everyone spends the night at the Hotel Barbas, close to the border to Mauritania as missing Dahid (our helper at the border) would be unwise.
A suggested trip is set out, but you will form your own itinerary, this is given as a guide to planning your trip, not as a prescriptive itinerary – it is your challenge. However, we strongly recommend that you have other teams with you through Mauritania, Senegal and onwards.  


IMPORTANT CONTACTS

Dave Clement 
(ME ..Dakar Dave aka Clemo)
0044 7817 355292 

rallyclemo@gmail.com




Dahid Jdeidou
Good friend of the challenge, our Mauritania guide / fixer.  He also helps provide Moulaye details for the Senegal border 1 car pass.
Dave will have sent all details to Dahid in advance re passport and car info to ease you through the Mauritanian border.  By sharing this information with Dave you implicitly agree that we need to share this data with Dahid and his team.  Dave is not responsible for the use of this data but trusts Dahid and have known him for several years.  No guarantee is given.  Any concerns, please speak with us.
00222 464 07530
dahid2@yahoo.fr
 Minyan Jobe (Sam)
Good friend of the challenge. Our Gambian man on the ground. Rotary club representative
Very well connected.
To whom cars are donated for auction in The Gambia. He then liaises with the charity requests.
All round good guy 
00220 704 6162





Roadbook Structure
This Roadbook provides guidance on the Dakar Challenges.  It consists of 3 parts:
Part 1 	Preparation and awareness 
Part 2 	Route information to Nouakchott 
Part 3 	Route from Nouakchott to Banjul 

introduction
The Challenge is  NOT A RACE OR RALLY and there are no benefits to arriving anywhere first.  There are no points or prizes, or status associated with being fastest over any section of the journey.  Racing on public highways is illegal in most countries.  Stay safe and observe all speed limits.  The slowest have the most fulfilling journey. Should you be asked by any official along the route, please convey in very clear terms to said official(s) that you are not part of any race, rally or any other motorsport event. This is a charity / Aid humanitaire challenge.  
Be flexible and willing to make up details as you go, some things you just have to deal with as you get to them.
DISCLAIMER
There is no requirement to follow what you read below.  It is offered to help you avoid some of the inconveniences involved in driving to The Gambia and should not be relied upon for the safety of yourself, your team members or the vehicles and property being taken with you.  You are travelling independently and unsupported on an inherently dangerous adventure. Please ensure you have the knowledge, equipment and ability necessary should emergencies, breakdowns, illness or injury occur in isolated places.
David Clement is not a travel agent and this Roadbook is meant as a guide for your trip. He (or anyone else representing Dakarchallenge.co.uk) if present on the trip, are in no way responsible for you, your safety, your driving standards and your vehicle.
Any participation on this ‘Challenge’ recognises this fact, and you continue at your own risk, having regard to any changes in Official Advice (UK , Spain , France , Latvian , Romanian , your home country Foreign Office etc)  as issued at any time.
Basically, you are responsible for your own decisions and actions. If at any point you become unhappy with this, you should stop and return home. Or if not yet departed, then be prepared to amend or cancel your trip to something YOU are happy with at YOUR own discretion.


You must do additional research. 
. 








Ohh this looks important, it’s in blue. 
Now the serious charity bit. Your car must be passed over to the Rotary club of The Gambia to be auctioned for local good causes. The same applies for The Nouakchott Challenge and the Sand job 4x4 in Mauritania. Please do not try to circumnavigate the system for your own charity or financial purposes. It has taken decades to work towards a harmonious agreement with the police, customs and government. We now have a smooth hand over free from any import tax. This fragile agreement could quite easily be broken. Things are very different down in Africa. In 2024 a tracker was fitted to a Dakar Challenge team who turned up early and passed through without the main group and paperwork. Their car was impounded and tax at a higher rate was levied as they did not donate direct to the Rotary club of The Gambia. We make sure the vehicle is signed out of any customs complications and removed from your passport enabling you to leave. Please realise we are here to have a lot of fun and make a bit of difference for the designated charities. If we do this together there will be no repercussions. Thanking you kindly for your attention.

Unsupported. Whilst the world is becoming an over regulated place to live, this doesn’t mean you can just disregard the bits you don’t like because you are abroad and think it won’t apply to you. It will and we won’t be able to get you out of prison if you have not adhered to local laws and customs. You are responsible for your own actions. Please act as an ambassador for your country. 
Your vehicle must be in a roadworthy condition. You must make sure you are adequately insured for every eventuality. This applies to your health insurance, Travel insurance and car insurance. Take the highest level available with air repatriation. The same applies to vaccinations. It is very different in Africa. Do your research. Get your jabs in advance, get your anti malaria tablets. You must have a full driving licence and have experience of driving on the European side of the road for prolonged periods of time. It’s obvious to say stop often, stay hydrated and check your vehicle every time you stop. If at any point you feel unwell stop and seek medical attention. If at any point you feel unsafe stop at the next nearest safe place. Seek police assistance. If at any point you don’t feel comfortable with the idea of what’s ahead - Stop get a taxi to the nearest airport and fly home. If the organiser takes part in any of the challenges it is because they enjoy travelling with new groups of challengers. No responsibility is taken or implied and they are not tour organisers or leaders. You are effectively buying a guide book with a chat page in order to chat amongst yourselves.  






The RoadBook Part 1
PREPARATION AND AWARENESS 
VISAS
This info is correct at the time of writing but do also check online.
Morocco:  The need for visas for Morocco is dependent on the country you reside in.  You will need to check the arrangements relevant to you.  Currently, EU / UK nationals do not need a visa for Morocco.  Check the requirements at 
https://www.moroccanconsulate.org.uk/en/Visa.html

Mauritania:  Everyone will need an E visa in advance to enter Mauritania, and these are NO LONGER available on the border.  This has created absolute CHAOS with people being refused entry if they do not have at least the Application number. We do have a work round with regards to this, but it is majorly important to get this done ASAP. As in when you finished reading this road book.  I cannot stress to you how important it is to do this early. Go to our Dakar challenge 2026 Facebook private members page for assistance on how to fill out the ever changing E visa requirements application form. You may well require a yellow fever vaccination certificate, though we have never been asked. 
Mauritanian E visa application form:-   https://anrpts.gov.mr/visa/requestvisa

Senegal: Now visa free for EU / UK nationals.  Check the requirements at https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/senegal 
 In 2024 teams from Norway and Australia thought they did not need a visa. THEY DO. We advised they needed a visa.  They left it to chance thinking they could get a Visa On Arrival. This was not the case as VOA is not available at the Diama Border and we NEVER CROSS AT ROSSO. We managed to solve the situation with a lot of phone calls, but it then caused them an issue leaving Senegal. 
You may need to show proof of your flight home.  For information, refer to
https://www.worldtravelguide.net/guides/africa/senegal/passport-visa/

Gambia:  Non EU / UK nationals should check if they need a visa in advance.
https://www.worldtravelguide.net/guides/africa/gambia/passport-visa/

Gibraltar:  Nationals of some countries will need visas to get onto Gibraltar.  If non EU / UK, do check.  







MAPPING APPS AND NAVIGATION
It is important to have a map app on your mobile device.  Download maps and routings for all the countries before you go to save data en-route.  Then use it as a satnav, it will be vital in cities where there are no signposts.  For example, it is the only way you can find the route to Diama border crossing to Senegal.
Decent map apps are:
Maps Me
OsmAnd+
Note that these two programs do not need an internet connection whereas google or Apple Maps do require an internet connection. It probably doesn’t need saying but internet connections can be very unreliable in western Africa.
.
For Garmin 
A map is essential but do not be surprised if the map you have indicates a main road where another might indicate a track.  It will be there, it is just a case of what standard it is. The different colour for roads denotes the state of them.
Google maps.
Now that we have sim cards with data readily available at the borders this is becoming a more popular way to travel. Do remember how bad Google maps can be at zig zagging you through a town  at home when there was a far straighter way of going. Well it still does that in Foreign lands too. A bonus is that google maps connects to your bookings.com resvervations.
Waze. Now also very available with handy speed trap notifications.
Take traditional paper maps for each country too – indispensable when planning your route with your team or a group of teams. Online route finders tend to take you through all the back streets. A paper map keeps you to the main routes and is more fun if you are trying to waste time with the police by playing the pointy pointy game.

PERSONAL HEALTH
You are responsible for your own medical arrangements, health and well-being while travelling.  We do not provide medical advice.  Do your own research and seek professional advice.  Travel books will provide basic information to start with, but EU & UK citizens can get a lot of information online. 
You may be required to show your yellow fever certificate / card when crossing some borders, i.e., Senegal.  My Yellow fever card states that it is valid for 10 years. It is now the case that this is a lifetime jab. If possible, get your paperwork updated to reflect the change in expiry date to lifetime. 
Get all the necessary immunisations and medicines etc. before departure and know what precautions to take en route.  Details can be found online or from your local medical practice. 
If you take medication, make sure you have enough with you to cover the whole journey.  A copy of your prescription would be a good idea (possibly even translated into French) – it could be needed to prove what meds you are taking and that they are legitimate.
If you put 10 cows and a human in a shed with mosquitoes, they will ignore the cows and head for the human.  Nobody knows why.  Here is some background on Malaria.  The statistics are incredible. It kills over a million people every year.  Malaria is just one of the medical issues that Challengers need to address well before departure.    
If you are an EU member you get medical support on your route through Europe from the local Health Service if you hold a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC)

British Nationals now need to make their own arrangements post Brexit.

Bear in mind that you are only entitled to receive the same level of medical support offered to locals and it may not equate to what you get for free in the UK/EU  
TRAVEL INSURANCE 
It is strongly recommended that you get appropriate travel insurance to cover your personal and medical needs. Consider insurance that covers medical evacuation.
PERSONAL INFORMATION SHEETS 
Locally known as ‘Fiches’, these really do speed up your passage at police check points.  If you don’t have yours, other teams will quickly tire of waiting while the officials have to write all your details at every checkpoint. They can also often be used at hotels in lieu of filling in the usual paperwork on arrival.  The further south you go in Morocco, the more often you will need these and into Senegal. Some years we have needed 5, others we’ve needed 65, it really is potluck.
Do one for each member of your crew and print lots of completed copies.  You may find you need fewer but better to have too many.  Completing it in French and adding your digital photograph can help but is not essential. 
At the points we are travelling together as a group Dave & Dahid will have these printed as a group list. Please be patient and don’t bugger off into the distance. It will cost us all a lot of time and confuse the officials. We really don’t want to do that as they hold all the power.
You will find the fiche document at the final page of this Roadbook.  
MONEY
It is advisable to split cash into smaller stashes kept separate and safe (never left in your car).  Only bring out on display small amounts at a time to avoid tempting crime / spiralling bribes.
A money belt is a good idea but ALWAYS keep it hidden. In 2025 one participant threw it over his shoulder. This was a big advert. He got robbed. It had his passport and money in it. He had to stay in Nouakchott for 11 days whilst a passport was sent up from Dakar. He is a well-travelled friend. He dropped his guard.
Don’t rely on just one bank card, have more ways to get money in case your ATM card suddenly stops working.
Don’t forget to inform your bank and bank card issuers when and where you are going so they don’t deny a charge when you just had your gearbox rebuilt in some out of the way locality.  
Particularly when in European hotels, make sure your credit cards are charged in local currency.  If they try to do it in your home currency, they are ripping you off on the exchange rate (Canadian cardholders should really watch out for this).  I have a starling account with a switchable Euro account on it. I get a much better rate than at the money exchange. 
Europe:  There will be plenty of ATMs and all cards are widely accepted.  
Morocco and Western Sahara (disputed):  Once you get into Morocco you will find more ATMs than you might at first assume, but do not rely on them being available outside the larger towns.  
Currency is Dirham (as of 2025 about 12.4/£).  This currency is abbreviated to ‘MAD’ which always raises a smile.  You cannot legally take this currency out of the country, but you can change it at the border.  Depending upon how many problems you have and just how extravagant you are while in Morocco you might expect to make €1500 per car last two weeks, including hotels and fuel. In some hotels they will accept euros for the room and give you the change in local. Fuel is paid in local currency. Small car repairs pay in local. Big car repairs pay in Euros. If you feel you have bought too much local currency then you can always use it to pay for rooms towards the exit of the country. Best to always have too much than too little,
Mauritania: Currency is Ouguiya (as at 2025 about 23/£).  You cannot legally take this currency out of the country, but you can change it at the border.
Senegal:  Currency is the CFA which is linked to the Euro. (As of 2025 740 CFA / £)
Gambia: Currency is Dalasi (as of 2025 is circa 85/ £). It does fluctuate daily. ATMs issue very small amounts. The banking system is often not working correctly so be prepared to queue in a bank.  The Gambia is not linked to the West African Banking system so this often causes outages and problems.  Most shops and hotels deal only in cash for this reason.
Euros are the alternative currency throughout Africa (we have varying stories on how easy it is to use $US) and are easy to change in banks and cambios in most towns and can often be used to pay in lieu of local currency so take plenty of small denominations.  
NOTE you are travelling in cash economies, opportunities to use ATMs and credit cards will be rare.  Withdrawal limits will be about £40 (typical local monthly wage) and you won’t get Euros from an African ATM.  Carry enough cash for the trip and make sure you exchange to enough local currency for smaller purchases in each country.  In emergencies Western Union can be found in larger cities.  DO NOT rely on ATMs.  They are rare outside larger towns beyond Marrakech and once half your fellow teams have emptied one of all its local cash you’re stuffed! 
Feedback 2024. I tend to use my Starling card as I have a Euro account attached to it. In settings I can change it to anything that gets presented in Euros gets paid from the Euro account side. This is helpful when on the Euro toll roads. I don’t get wacked with a conversion and handling charge. This also works on bookings.com for hotels. Get it charged in Euros and save the conversion fee. The Starling card works best in Europe it then becomes a bit hit and miss in Africa. For Morocco I tend to exchange my home currency to Moroccan Dirham on the border. There is not much point changing sterling to Euro to then change it to Dirham. You are just losing out every time it gets changed. Money changers on all borders will take any world currency. They will also take any leftovers you have from the previous country. I also set up Sendwave on my phone. 
Feedback 2024: Dave sent me a link and we both got 10 euros when I opened the account. I used this to pay for the Zebrabar accommodation, food and bar bill.  Then the hotel in Dakar. It worked in The Gambia too at the Bakadaji hotel. Same again including food and bar bill. Was very helpful as I was running out for local currency. The exchange rate on Sendwave and Starling is better than anywhere else. 
General observation. A fair few people had boozed up their stash of cash by the time they reached Dakhla. Make sure you keep your Euro Desert fees separate from your day to day spends. Whilst I managed to find a friendly black market money exchanger in Dakhla for those to use let’s not rely on him.
 Final note on money. In 2025 we arrived at a petrol station in Mauritania. One of our group didn’t want to exchange and get local money. The petrol station said they would accept euros. He filled then argued about the rate. We were talking about a small percentage here. He then went to find a local bank, which the machine was empty, He came back and agreed the original rate. DON’T BE THAT GUY. It cost us 45 minutes and meant we arrived that night in the dark. It completely messed the day up and made him rather unpopular.




PREPARING YOUR CAR
It’s a road trip. Making sure your car is ready for it is obviously fundamental to success!  There are several things you must do and plenty of things you could do to ensure your old banger is ready for Africa.  
You will need to know how to check all the fluid levels daily. Jump start your car, even learn how to start it with easy start (This may be your last hope).  Change a wheel, replace a blown bulb, remove and clean the air filter.  Make sure you know how to do these things before you set off. Worth making sure all your wheel nuts haven’t been over tightened with an air gun before you leave. 
Note:  Don’t forget that you will be driving through France and Spain en route to Morocco and there are very specific requirements for what you need to have in your car if you do not wish to be fined, should you be stopped.  This information can be found online before you leave and will also be provided at ferry ports in UK, along with inflated prices for purchasing anything you have forgotten!  
Be aware of the ‘Crit-Air’ Zones in various French cities (similar to UK ULEZ system). ONLY If your planned routes encompass these locations, you will need to obtain a windscreen sticker.
https://www.rac.co.uk/drive/news/motoring-news/law-change-for-uk-drivers-in-french-cities/
https://www.drive-france.com/crit-air-sticker/
https://www.eurotunnel.com/uk/driving-in-france/ 
https://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/information/travel-advice/driving/spain
Certain areas of France require snow chains / socks during certain months of the year.
https://www.service-public.fr/particuliers/actualites/A14389?lang=en
If you breakdown on the motorway in France towing is prohibited. If you do not have cover then local recovery will be given and charged appropriately. Check if your bank gives international break down cover. Nova Direct online can cover for as little as £20.

ITEMS TO TAKE WITH YOU
Don’t take anything you can’t afford to leave if your car breaks down. Fellow travellers may not want to pick you up if you have 7 suitcases and the kitchen sink.  Below is guidance, not an exhaustive list, but be sensible about weight etc.  Remember you will probably need to leave all tools due to flight luggage weight restriction. However they get collected up and donated to Crab Island technical and vocational education training centre. 

Feedback in 2019/20:  Our Jaguar needed 2 new tyres, a new alternator, battery, wheel hub/bearing, key fob battery, and a new wheel nut.  The only tools we had was WD40, gaffer tape, jump leads, a jack, a standard saver tyre and a torch.  We found so much help and met brilliant people who were delighted to help us and chat over mint tea.  So if you are daft enough not to have a basic tool kit, you will be able to find help – but we did have to change our plans as a result of car difficulties, missing the high Atlas Mountains but it just means we will do these next time!

Item
Comments
People 3
Maximum of 3 people. Leaving a spare seat for a potential new passenger. 
Improve ground clearance
Ideally 5 to 7 inches under the sump (guard) but without compromising the handling too much – fitting larger diameter steel wheels (from a bigger car from the same manufacturer for instance) and 80 aspect ratio (van) tyres is the easiest way to do this. Also think about re-profiling the front spoiler/bumper which will be low. Have a lay down in front of the car and shine a torch on all the bits that hang down and see if it’s possible to raise, move, smooth them, protect them from harm or remove them.
Wheels / Tyres
2 spares, locking wheel nut remover, wheel brace, jack.
Battery
This is a big, heavy lump which you must secure properly – Obviously check the original mounting points and supplement this with (say) 2 or 3 large zip ties wrapped round the body of the battery and the tray it’s sitting on. Give the terminals a good clean.
Under bonnet hoses and lines
Thoroughly check all of these.
Sand ladders
Sand ladders are a must. Do not enter the desert without them. If you do not bring them then you very much underestimate what a desert is. You will need a stable platform for jacking the car up in the desert as well as getting you out of the sand.  However, balance the fact that you will need to leave them behind when you fly back so keep costs to a minimum. Contrary to internet memes carpet or artificial turf, etc do not work. Get real sand ladders. Your travelling companions will thank you (or at least not kill you in your sleep.) 
Air compressor
Tyres, air beds, make sure the power lead for the inflator will get to all four tyres from the cigarette lighter/battery.
Jack
If you can get a small scissor/ bottle jack in addition to the one in the car this can double as an axle stand and can also be used to push bent bodywork away from your tyres after crashing. Try jacking the car before you leave and know the jack points.
Fuses / headlight lamps
Make sure you have a spare for each fuse – these can be taped to the fuse-box cover but don’t obscure the guide on what fuse does what job.
Metal weld
When in the desert this might be your last hope
20 litre jerry cans x1 or 2 depending on car size
And a funnel.  Wrapping in a decent plastic bag will help prevent smells and spills.  Make sure that the funnel is long enough to  bypass the traps in the filler pipe.
Oil
Small can for topping up
Easy start 
Your last hope when all else fails.
Torch
Get a solar chargeable one which can also charge from your car battery
Tow rope/ Bungee cords / ratchet straps / cable ties / gaffer tape
Tow it, pull it, hold it, bodge it back together again. Essential kit.
Water
Either large camping containers or lots of smaller bottles.  Fill up at every opportunity.  To save littering Africa with more plastic bottles, think about taking a bottle such as a LifeStraw which can be filled with contaminated water and cleaned simply. Make sure any water you buy has unbroken seals.
www.buylifestraw.com 
Storage
The sand and dust in the desert WILL get everywhere so zip lock plastic bags, cheap Tupperware type containers or similar will prevent food / tea bags etc. getting particularly ‘crunchy’.  Also applies to your phone / Sat Nav / Camera.
First aid kit
If you take medication, make sure you have enough with you to cover the whole journey (and spare).  A copy of your prescription would be a good idea – it could be needed to prove what meds you are taking and that they are legitimate
Hand sanitising fluid
Good to save water for drinking rather than hand washing.
Keys
Extra ones kept separate in case of loss. You will lose them at least once and panic sets in very quickly.
Sun stuff and bug repellent
Sunscreen and sunglasses. Bug/Mosquito creams and repellents for Senegal and The Gambia. 
Camping stuff
Tent (self-supporting variety because tent pegs don’t hold very well in sand), sleeping bag, sleeping mat or raised bed frame as stones are very uncomfortable. Small folding shovel for alfresco pooing.
Cooking stuff
Small camping stove with extra gas bottles, matches, couple of saucepans, camping kettle, plate, mug, cutlery, sharp knife.
Toilet paper
If you get sick and find yourself crouched over a squatting closet for hours, hugging your roll of familiar TP will ease the pain.  The local alternatives are not pleasant!
Take it with you everywhere!  Take lots of it!
Documents and admin stuff
Passport. MAKE SURE IT HAS SIX MONTHS UPON YOUR RETURN LEFT ON IT. 
Get used to keeping this in the same place after every use. Do not keep it in the door pocket. I once had mine stolen by a youth who lent in a nicked it. (On the Tashkent rally. Dave)
Car logbooks (V5) – take copies too and try not to hand over your real one.  Have some colour copies handy, one may be mistaken for the original!
Insurance policy
Driving licence 
Guidebooks and maps (download before leaving to save data)
Personal Information Sheets (Fiches) Plenty
Bookings for ferries, flights etc
Yellow fever card with your other inoculations and medical information written in or attached. 
A good idea to leave a copy of your passport and driving licence and insurance at home with a contact
Mobile phone, preloaded with apps like MapsMe, WhatsApp, 
Spare mobile phone to put a local sim card in. Charger and usb adapters for car.
International plug
The Gambia uses both UK/EU sockets.  Most hotels need a 2 pin. 
Clothing
Dress code in Africa
Be respectful of religious customs
In places of worship women should wear headscarf and loose clothes to cover wrists and ankles, men should wear trousers.
Coat
Scarves / warm hat 
Suitable for multi-purpose use - for warmth in Europe, wrapped around head for staying cool in the desert and to cover your face in sandstorms. It gets surprisingly cold at night so make sure you are prepared – particularly in the Atlas Mountains which can get down to -8.
Warm lightweight jacket / layers of light clothing
From -4 in Europe to Africa +40 it starts cold and gets warmer and warmer the further you get so take appropriate clothing for all. 

The following may be required:
Requirement
Country
A valid, full UK driving licence - the photo card
France/Spain
A “UK” sticker clearly displayed on the back of your car – Unless your car is EU registered, whereupon check your own requirements.
France/Spain
Your motor insurance details
France/Spain
Headlamp converters (stickers you put on your headlights when you're driving on the right, so your lights don't dazzle motorists coming the other way)
France/Spain
In France ALL drivers must be over the age of 18
France
‘Crit-Air’ sticker/vignette depending on your route and vehicle type as with snow chains. Route dependant.
France
 2x warning triangles and reflective jackets for each person if you break down or have to pull over to change a wheel or deal with any other problems.  The reflective jacket must be kept inside the vehicle (not in the boot) so you can reach it without exiting the vehicle.  If you don't have these, you could be fined around €90.
France
Two warning triangles inside the car - if you break down you should put one in front and one behind your car.
Spain
A reflective jacket within reach inside the car. You'll need to wear this if you stop for any reason outside built-up areas, even if you're just setting up a warning triangle.
Spain
Spare bulbs for your car's external lights, plus the tools to fit them.
Spain
New for 2026  V16 Flashing warning beacon
Spain

CAR  VEHICLE REGISTRATION DOCUMENT PAPERWORK FOR EVERYONE  

This being your country’s version of the vehicle registration document.  V5 in UK. Please have a vehicle document in place and in your name for the lead driver at least 2 months before departure date. Dave / Dahid / Sam will require a colour copy scan to send in advance to help aid onward movement. This must be a decent colour scan, not a badly taken photograph on a mobile phone. This is of vital importance you get this right. It pisses the Officials off that Dave has to deal with if it is a bad copy.

NEED A CAR? For fly ins only. (Not lazy people who can’t be bothered to buy a car themselves.) Alan from Oddball Motors can buy and prepare a car for you. He is a good friend of the challenge and has done them many times before so knows what’s ahead. However not even he can guarantee it will make it. These cars are old. He will put a sump guard on it and a roof rack. Register it in your name at his farm address in the UK. The rest is up to you, you will need to tax and insure it. It is possible to do online and then cancel once in Morocco.
Email acart54@aol.com Alan Cartwright.


NEED A RECEIPT? Usually Sam  (our Gambian charity auction contact) does not provide an official receipt for your vehicle when it is handed over for auction in Banjul.  But if you need one due to your home country regulations, contact Dave. Please have an idea of what you want written on it. 
CAR INSURANCE
For Europe:  Check your policy to make certain of insurance coverage for European travel and possibly beyond.  Most UK policies will cover you for 3rd party while in the EU.  If it does, bring your policy document on the run. If for some reason your company does not cover you then you can get European cover in Britain prior to departure. Africa will be more difficult (see below for this).  
When talking to insurance companies, do not say you are going on a “rally”.  It will cause a lot of misunderstanding and the truth is you are NOT going on a “rally”.  The trip is not competitive, it isn’t organized in the true sense of a rally either.  Essentially, it’s just an eccentric motoring holiday or a bunch of like-minded people all travelling in the same direction. Uninsured motorists get arrested in all countries we travel through. 
For Africa: buying insurance on African borders is the answer.  You may be able to get coverage for Morocco in the UK or EU, but the Moroccan Police might not accept it and then fine you or worse cart you to the police station and eat into your time. Just buy insurance at the Moroccan border, It is straightforward enough and can be obtained at the port of entry (see Morocco section).  It will cost about €55 / 65 for two weeks for a standard saloon car, although if you pay in € expect to lose out on the exchange rate. We have noted over the last few years that LV, Saga and some others will cover Morocco do check the policy.
Everyone will have to buy insurance when entering Mauritania.  We have not known anyone make a claim on African insurance policies.  They are sold for very short periods so make sure yours are long enough to transit the country concerned. 
Insurance for Senegal is included in the Senegal 1 car pass fee. This is collected in advance prior to leaving. 

ACCIDENTS If you have an accident. Normally the repair prices are sorted out roadside between drivers. If you caused it then do the right thing and pay up. Even if you didn‘t cause it but are only arguing over a wing mirror then weigh up the possible time lost versus 5 euros for a new one. That said if you are not in the wrong and don’t fancy coughing up stick to your guns. Be aware this is a lengthy process time wise. The police will be called. Do not move your vehicle. Take photographs and argue your case. It is likely both parties will have to go to the police station and argue their case there. Take your insurance document and keep pointing at it.


VEHICLE OWNERSHIP DOCUMENTS (V5 IN UK) 
Known as the ‘logbook’.  You will need to take it with you and a couple of decent colour copies are useful. I tend to hand a decent copy over rather than the real thing just in case we get a troublesome Police officer that wants to keep it.  Note that to cross international borders the registered owner / keeper must accompany the vehicle (although do not expect to be checked in Europe). Please have a vehicle document in place and in your name for the lead driver at least 2 months before departure date. Dave / Dahid / Sam will require a colour copy email scan to send in advance to help aid onward movement. This must be a decent colour scan, not a badly taken photograph on a mobile phone.
TAX AND MOT
If you left Britain, you can cancel your car tax online at the tax refund GOV site.
Though this is more prudent to do once into Morocco. The Spanish police still impound untaxed UK vehicles, though it is unknown how they know post Brexit, as the cross-border database in no longer in force. That said it did happen to a recent team.
You do not need a MOT outside Europe.  When you return from the Challenge declare your car to be permanently exported using the RED slip on your car logbook. 

VANS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
You may not be allowed into Morocco without extra paperwork. Please satisfy yourself that you have the right documentation. In 2025 A UK registered long wheelbase high top transit van was fine. The only difference is when it got to the customs scanner into Morocco. They had to go in the commercial lane.

KEEPING IN TOUCH
In this high-tech comms world there is a plethora of communication methods but here are some thoughts on what is available to you and what you might consider.
Mobile Phone:  There is good mobile phone coverage in populated areas of Morocco and on main roads.  You will need to watch the costs though, especially if you use data.  Check with your mobile phone company for an "international bundle" or other cost saving offers for overseas calls and check you have international roaming unlocked (although you may wish to block data roaming to save on large and unexpected data costs.)
Rates for calls / texts / data, will be sent to you via a text before you enter each of the countries you will be travelling through.
WHATSAPP IS KING. Have WhatsApp downloaded so you can stay in touch with the rest of the group.
It is worthwhile getting a local sim with DATA on your way into EVERY African border as they are so cheap.  You will need an unlocked mobile phone for this to work.  You may have a phone where you can insert two SIM cards – your existing one and an additional one.
If you use your mobile without changing to / adding a local SIM, try to use WIFI as much as possible in hotels and use data sparingly only when WIFI isn’t available, expect a phone bill of around £350 for the cautious user when you get home.  
Feedback from 2023:  I took an unlocked iPhone. I gave it to a Moroccan sim seller who did a full factory reset and it became locked as the phone was outside the Uk. I therefore didn’t have a phone to put a local sim card in. This made communications very difficult and expensive. If your spare phone doesn’t work with a local sim take it back and walk away. Try somewhere else. We spent hours with this guy. As helpful as he was it just didn’t work once messed with.
Feedback 2024. WhatsApp is king now. Get a sim card from a seller on the border. This is the best place to do it as you will have time whilst sorting insurance and money. 20GB lasted through Morocco and that was using it for google maps too. Nobody uses a conventional phone calls in Africa its only WhatsApp. Get it on a different phone from your home one though. 

Feedback from 2025. It all fell to pieces very quickly; we made a real mess of it. We needed a local sim for the few days in Senegal but didn’t bother. We got towed into the Zebrabar and got a local flatbed driver to take the car to the Gambian border. They took it to the wrong one. Half a day in the wrong direction. We could not contact them as we didn’t have a local sim. 
E Sims: These are not yet fully functional for how we need them to operate. Unless you can get one that does every country the technology is flawed. Some need to be live to the internet via your data in order to switch to the next country / mast supplier ( EE , Africell etc) However once you swap to the next supplier in settings you are no longer live to the internet and thus cannot kick start the reboot to attach to the new supplier. This is when you cross over borders when you need the phone most. You then have to wait until you get to the hotel WIFI in order to activate the new supplier. It’s as complicated to try and explain as it is to write. I used Airlo and it was not user friendly and it is still a costly way of doing it. I also used Holafly. Research them both before you leave. They may have improved by 2026. That said - Stick to spare phone and local sims with data it is much easier.
Walkie Talkie:  OBLIGATORY from 2024 onwards. If we all buy the same then there are no issues. Don’t be the only person who bought the wrong one..  
I will put a link on the Facebook page to the one we should all use. Some German teams found them difficult but not impossible to import from AliExpress.
Walkie talkies are honestly essential, make convoying so much easier and are a source of great banter for the monotonous stretches. Do turn it off and hide it in the glove box when going through borders.
Do a radio check each morning to make sure everyone’s radio is working, turned up and on the correct channel.  If a car has been quiet for a while check they can still hear you, waving a radio out your window will usually lead to them checking the radio and realising it was turned down/off.
Note that the PMR446 band is license-free in the EU only. In the countries you are travelling through it is licensed spectrum. The authorities could legitimately confiscate the radios and prosecute you.  In practice this is unlikely.  However, take the precaution of concealing the radios at checkpoints and roadblocks.  In big towns you may get interference from local radio users (maybe police or just the local taxi firm).  Whenever this happens keep communications to a minimum.
Feedback from 2018:  On the recent trip we had problems communicating with other teams via the cheap walkie talkies.
The basic problem is that I have a cheap pair that we used on the 2015 trip. We had no problems on that trip because most of the group had shared the purchase of a quantity of cheap handsets, so the radios communicated with each other without problem. Our radios were compatible and none of us were aware that the potential problem existed. On this year's trip we used the same pair of radios and we had constant problems. Right from the start we found that some cars couldn't hear us, although we were able to hear them. It just didn't make sense, as we were both on the same frequency. I eventually found that the biggest culprits were usually, but not exclusively, Motorola radios. It would be much easier and sensible to all be on the same units.

WIFI:  Widely available for free in hotels restaurants and cafes, often insecure.  Of course, when a bunch of travellers descend and try uploading photos, facetiming and the like it can get a bit slow!  Do watch out for excessive charges in some hotels.  

Facebook:  All participants should feel free to chat on the Dakar Challenge Facebook page. There is no other forum – ask to join through that link and we will confirm you. Quote your name and team number. Usually, Dave will have done this upon receipt of your initial sign up. We set up a closed group each year so you can get to know your fellow travellers and the ‘on the road’ one is always live so everyone else (friends and family) can see what’s going on.

WhatsApp:  All participants will be invited to join the WhatsApp group before the start so you can get to know each other and keep in touch enroute.  If you buy a local SIM card and your number changes, the WhatsApp group stays the same. A great way of asking for help from other teams or pinning a location so that people knows where you are or where a hotel is.  
If you are not familiar with WhatsApp before you go, do get familiar with it, particularly pinning location and using the WIFI calling options for reassuring family members back home that everything is fine. ONLY MEMBERS ON THE CHALLENGE WILL BE ACCEPTED, PLEASE DO NOT ADD ANYONE AT HOME WHO WISH TO FOLLOW YOUR PROGRESS, you should use your own accounts for this.
RESPECTING LOCAL CULTURE
Do research into each of the countries you will be visiting / travelling through to be aware of the local situation.  It is also worth checking the Foreign Office information from your home country. 
Be careful what you say while travelling in all countries visited, just like home, avoid discussions of politics and religion.  Maybe do your own background reading too. 

DO NOT SAY WESTERN SAHARA WHEN IN MOROCCO. It is still disputed lands. The Border guards will destroy any maps that say Western Sahara.  If they even find his road book, they might take it. Be sure to tell them that you are understanding of their plight and you are here to enjoy their wonderful hospitality and will be sending home positive messages about their amazing country. Get them on side. 
Do the complete opposite the other side of the border.

Your trip will be all the more rewarding if you communicate with the local people.  You won’t regret it and you don’t need to speak the same language either.  The vast majority of people everywhere in the world have the same basic interests at heart and want to be friendly.
Treat people as you would wish to be treated.  For example, if a restaurant doesn’t sell beer, don’t smuggle in your own.  It will cause the same reaction that you’d get at home.  Respect that you will be travelling in countries where there is often no alcohol available.
In predominantly Muslim North dress is somewhat conservative.  The big cities of Morocco are fairly cosmopolitan. It was widely thought that women should completely cover up but this is no longer the case. Except in places of worship. 
Feedback from 2024:  Elaine (Mrs Dakar Dave) This year I went armed with scarves, long dresses and loose trousers for Morocco and Mauritania but was pleasantly surprised. Morocco wasn’t an issue, I wore trousers as the weather wasn’t too warm anyway, but skinny jeans were not frowned upon as once thought and I popped a cardigan on when I got out of the car and assessed the environment each time. I never needed to cover my hair as we didn’t go to any religious sites. I asked Dahid (our main man in Mauritania) and he said it wasn’t necessary to cover up there now either as his country had moved on with the times and many of the ladies wore western clothing and some don’t cover their hair anymore. We spent 2 days in Nouakchott, and this was true. Modest clothing is still better as you don’t want to draw unwanted attention to yourself with tiny shorts and low-cut tops but it wasn’t a problem to show your arms or have your hair out.
Senegal and the Gambia you will see an instant change in the lady’s attire, it becomes vibrant and feminine and they don’t mind what you wear. So if you want to put a nice strappy sun dress on, on your rest day, go for it!
All of the above being said, still take scarves, long dresses and loose trousers because they are comfy, cover you from bugs in the warmer countries at night and in the desert a scarf round your face will protect from the sand.


Don’t ask questions needing a yes or no answer because saying ‘no’ is impolite and locals won’t say it.  Ask “which way is Cap Tafarit?” rather than asking, “Is this the way to Cap Tafarit?” when the reply will always be ‘yes’, whether or not it is correct.
Once in Africa, be careful taking photographs, it is best to ask first.   
To a Muslim, bread is sacred so don't start bunfights, don't waste it, or publicly chuck it away if it goes stale.
When haggling in the souks, foreigners generally don’t know a good deal from a bad one, often entering with the attitude that it should be a fight.  But if you shop with a local person, you soon realise it’s a sort of polite dance with certain protocols.  Everyone should be smiling at the end of the deal.  However, the savvier vendors are wise to guidebooks that tell us to pay roughly half the asking price when in some cases the walk-away price can be as little as a tenth. Best of luck!
If you are lucky enough to get invited to a family home, take a gift of something useful, food etc.  People live on very limited incomes.
Your participation will necessitate patronising squatting toilet facilities without loo paper (so take your own). But please remember to sluice after use so the next intrepid customer doesn’t throw up from the sights and smells you left behind!  A bucket of some kind should be at hand. Some countries the paperwork goes in the bin not down the hole. Ask or look for a bin. Blocking up the loo can cause bad smells, embarrassment and a fine. Hand sanitiser a must afterwards! Ladies and Gent’s toilets are not often communal, so girls do check to see if the ladies is round the back as quite often they are in a different place to the gents. 



TOILETS/ ON THE ROAD.
This is still respecting local cultures. 
France seems to have removed all their toilet seats in Service stations and so has Portugal.
Spain has toilet seats.
Morocco has seats and dropsies that get a bit smellier the further down south you travel.
Mauritania few and far between.
Senegal nice and clean again. Euro loo and dropsies.
The Gambia euro and dropsies.
Always have a travel pack of tissues in your pocket. From Europe down the paper becomes less available. In Africa you are now in Shataf land. I think it converts to shit off, but I might be wrong. It’s a mini shower head squirter thing. When that disappears it’s a pan and handle with a big bucket of water. Always check first. There might be a tap in the wall but it might not work. Look for the big drum of water before getting into position. If using paper it goes in the bin not down the loo or hole in floor. Same applies for hotels and restaurants.
Paying for the privilege. Even if these toilets are manky old holes in the floor and not particularly clean this is someone’s job. It really is the worst job in the world, but they turn up every day and make an effort. They really don’t enjoy it either. Spare a bit of change and a smile. It helps their day.



AL FRESCO Be discreet.

In the wilds of the outdoors when nature calls.
You will see local men stopping for a wee and not always in the most discreet way. 
I would not advise this! 
Men - behind a bush or front wheel.
Ladies – Behind the bush also or between the opened car doors method is quite good.  Front and back door open. My wife Elaine got quite used to this method. I keep an eye out and stand in the way. We did take a beach towel to do some covering but there was very little to no other traffic around, so we gave up with that in the end. Two hands on the car sill, squat down and off you go.
For the other movement a travel shovel and a short walk is your friend.








DRIVING IN AFRICA
Expect a great variation of local driving standards.  In places it is nothing less than frantic (try Marrakech at rush hour).  Do not ever consider night driving in rural areas because people, animals, vehicles, and other things are often left on the road without lights.  Extra lights on your car looks cool in the desert and might be useful on these highways and byways.  In many places, pedestrians are not given right of way regardless of the local laws.  In Morocco and maybe elsewhere, car parks can be found where your vehicle will be guarded (including overnight) for a small fee. There is always someone who is happy to look after you, so please don’t be wary of a goatherder making such an offer – they are not going to rob you, take the opportunity to share a cup of tea and help the poor.
Some main roads are toll roads, especially through France and Spain – these are a great way of getting big notes changed into smaller notes (if you can find a human).  Note the speed limits change rapidly as you near them. Check the overhead as you approach to choose cash or card lane. If using the Moroccan human cash payment booth check the digital display usually just beyond the barrier. In 2025 we got stung for a big note. We asked for the receipt, but he made some excuse. When we drove away we saw the amount on the display, we had been ripped off.
Huge speedbumps abound in West Africa – particularly Senegal.  Beware of these on the road from the border – you may be overjoyed at getting through the border crossing, but don’t get stymied by flying off the top of a speed bump and crunching into the tarmac. There is often a big boulder or lump of wood either side of them to forewarn you they are there and stop you from driving onto the path.


DEALING WITH OFFICIALS
Checkpoints are very common.  Most African checkpoint police will be polite and friendly.  So be polite too, smile and relax. In short, treat them as you would wish to be treated.  If you chill and work with them, rather than against them, they are far better than rumour suggests.  
If they start trying it on (this is actually quite rare now though) asking for things, try to give them a polite smile and a handshake. If they get fairly insistent then give them a pen or something small like chocolate to smooth things over, like the smellies you took from the European hotels. But (IMPORTANT) do not be too generous as it spoils it for others.  Border guards will then expect big gifts from all the challengers following you. Do NOT give cash as it sets up the expectation for the cars following to do the same and if you give £10, the next car gets charged £20, which goes up to £40, £80 etc…. and they will have told their mates down the road, so it will happen again. They are always in radio communication between themselves. Be prepared to lose a bit of time, but not money – it is their way of doing things.
From  2003/2004 teams in the early years.
One team ahead of us had written a note under duress saying they had paid a fee to pass. This had quickly been doctored to say £200 which we paid. We thought it was strange, but we were cornered. Then everyone behind got held up for hours as they waited for £200 per car payment. It was only the strength in numbers that got us through. We blocked the road and made a nuisance of ourselves before they let us through. This could have backfired badly. If only they hadn’t have written anything. Moral of story be polite but do not write or sign anything. 

 Police Scams. 2025 on the way to the meet up point by the American embassy in Mauritania 1 team got cut off from the main group. Easily done there are a lot of traffic lights. Here comes the police sting. They wait till the traffic lights turn red. Then signal to you with their red pointy stick and summons you forward and park by the side of the road. Then when you get there they say it wasn’t you they wanted and then fine you for jumping the red lights. Then threaten to take you to the police station for the paperwork or pay the fine on the spot. This is a complete scam. Do not ever move forward until the lights have changed. 
 Also, we were made aware of a roadside bad cop on one of the main routes through Thies in Senegal. He was a complete bastard. He was aggressive. Now this is difficult for me to tell you what to do in this situation. You must do what you feel is right. I carry my out of date driving licence and next time I am in Thailand will get some fake copies made up too. He asked for their passport. They showed a copy. This was repeated a few times. He also asked what have you got for me? Eventually when they handed their driving licence over, he said you will have to collect it from the police station tomorrow. (At this point I would say yes that’s fine and go to drive off) However they felt pressured by this and ended up giving him their fridge and some money. They still didn’t get the licence back. He did it to another team an hour later. They then posted this on WhatsApp with a pin drop and a warning message. Other teams drove past and didn’t stop. They just ignored him. Most other teams took a diversion route onto the other main road so missed him completely. This backs up the importance of buying a local sim, of WhatsApp, knowing how to pin drop and sadly how to deal with corrupt police. If you are in a mini convoy and the lead car spots a single roadside police stop. The passenger gets onto the walkie talkie and warns the cars behind, If the lead cars stops try not to all stop. The rest go on and wait out of sight up the road. 

 If you meet an official-looking cavalcade of cars, with lights blazing, motorcycle outriders and maybe pick-ups full of armed military, get out of the way IMMEDIATELY and STOP.  They are highly dangerous from a traffic point of view, fiercely aggressive if anyone dares to get in their way and with sufficient political power for the police to have to be seen to be 'dealing with’ any motorists or pedestrians unfortunate enough to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.  

Be patient at borders:  The officials will try your patience and you may have to wait hours.  The process is being “modernised” slowly.  In 2019/20 one team had to lend the Mauritanian border guards a car battery to get their generator going so the computers would work! Our fixers will be on hand to help. 

From a 2019/20 team:  We are a car of women and car problems meant we drove at night a few times.  It was fine, except that at checkpoints in Southern Morocco and Senegal in the dark, there were chaps in Royal Mail hi vis jackets!  They clearly were not police / army / security but were having a bit of fun.  We were polite – jokingly pointed to their Royal Mail livery and were waved on our way.  
At one checkpoint manned by female police, we had forgotten to put our car documents in the car on leaving the hotel and got a severe reprimand.  We were asked to report to the police station to complete paperwork and pay a fine, but when we said we didn’t know where to go, we were waved on.
Another occasion, we had a difficult security guard at a checkpoint who asked us for some money.  We explained we had just paid our hotel bill and hadn’t been to the bank that day so had no cash.  Instead we offered a gift of 4 coffee sachets, some sweets and an energy bar.  We only offered these gifts when necessary and not at every checkpoint of course.  
AVOIDING FINES
Make no mistake, the local police know you are coming and when. You will need to be careful to avoid getting a fine for an ‘infraction’ and they are armed with plenty of radar guns.  That said, the police are becoming more professional every year and they are generally tourist friendly.  If you are stopped for a 'fine', talk only in English, this can really stump them. If this is an official radar speed trap rather than just nosey police stop then you have been caught. There are 3 brackets of fine. Low, Medium and High. Which is about £15, £30 and £60 in Morocco. You get a nice paper certificate to keep and frame. You will be required to hand over your driving licence. My out of date one worked in this situation,
Stick to the speed limit: speed cameras and radar guns abound.
At check points always actually stop at the ‘Stop’ sign and drive forward only when asked to do so.  On main roads checkpoints are common and also in small towns.
Where there is a solid white line in the middle of the road do not overtake – can incur a 100€ fine.
Don’t Park up on the side of the road in sight of a checkpoint.
Don’t do a U turn on the road in sight of a checkpoint.
Watch out for other drivers flashing their lights from the opposite direction this is to warn you there is a speed trap ahead. 
FUEL 
France is expensive, Spain slightly cheaper, Morocco cheaper still, Laayoune is near a refinery so drops again, It then creeps up again much to your annoyance. Mauritania is expensive and poor quality. Senegal becomes cheaper again. Fill your car tank down the road at the red petrol station close to the Zebrabar you should be able to make it to the Gambia via the ferry. (Red station also has a digital airway pump for tyres.) 
Fuel in Western Sahara is only available in large towns so plan ahead. When leaving a town, work out if you need to re-fuel before the next one. Most of us will have filled up at the station by the Hotel Barbas including our fuel cans. There are 3 stations one is usually a bit cheaper than the rest. Every little helps!
From Laâyoune southward, petrol may be difficult to get at times but diesel seems to be everywhere (sometimes just a stack of jerry cans).  However on the 2025 run it would seem SHELL is having a big expansion programme down that part so we may be lucky. But please don’t rely on these fuel stations out in the middle of nowhere.
It is advisable to buy petrol whenever it is available and brim it daily.  It is not unusual for petrol stations to be completely out.  
Octane rating declines as you travel south and is very low in Mauritania.  If your car is susceptible to this, carry octane booster and / or try to keep some high octane in your jerry cans to blend in the tank as needed. You do have jerry cans. Don’t you?
From Morocco onwards fuel is pumped by an attendant and paid for in local currency.
On the run in 2023 at Tan Tan we got conned at the pump. The attendant filled the car and without us seeing the price on the pump, zeroed it and went to fill the team behinds car. When we came to pay, we noted the number could not be seen as he had moved on. He said he had written it on his hand. This number did not tally up with the ¼ of a tank we needed as it was the full tank price. We paid and realised we had been “had” the more we discussed the con.
A similar con also happened where the previous amount had not been zeroed and then the car was filled. Giving an extremely high figure at the end. Make sure you have eyes on the pump as the attendant is finishing.
Fuel is very expensive in Mauritania. We were on high alert after the above con. This time we weren’t being conned; it really was that expensive.


WATER
Worse than running out of fuel is running out of water, so carry at least twice what you think you need at any point in time.  Better not to waste drinking water on washing up in the most remote places and don’t forget you may need radiator water too.  Please do not throw empty bottles out of your car even if there are millions of them there already, It really is a sad sight.

DRIVING IN SAND. 
Now the fun bit. DO NOT DRIVE TOO CLOSE. LEAVE PLENTY OF SPACE. The sand will catch you out very quickly. Too close and everyone gets stuck. 
Walkie talkies are essential for this part of the journey.
When you get stuck (and you will) garden gloves are better than shovels but take one anyway.  You will need a piece of wood for your car jack and tyre pump so they don’t sink into the sand.  Best to let your tyres down to maybe 10psi / 0.7bar your guide will advise. An electric pump would help for blowing them up later. Do not deflate to a point where you are “running on a flat” At the first bump in the sand, the rim will cut the tyre off the rim.
Walkie talkie call “STOP - STOP - STOP - IM STUCK” Get out and assess your great sinking skills and wait for the rest of your group to arrive with sand ladders and pushing power.
If you are the teams going back to help the stranded stop on some hard ground and walk back. This may be a fair way away. That’s just how it is. If it’s the same car again and again offload some of their kit into another car and leave a stack of sand ladders in the problem car.
Certain cars are more susceptible to sinking. Don’t automatically think it is down to the bad driver. You will quicky come to realise which car it is. Maybe put them at the front of the mini group or put the guide in that car. Please remember to have fun and laugh lots at this point. You probably won’t ever experience this level of adult stupidity. Enjoy the moment and take lots of photographs, when we all meet up that night for a BBQ other teams will want to see the proof.
Drive too slowly and you get stuck, too fast and you do unspeakable things to your suspension and exhaust.  Try not to ride the clutch but do rev the nuts off the engine as you need power to get through soft sand. MORE POWER as Jeremy Clarkson would say, and he’s not wrong. 
Automatic transmissions work well in the sand but not essential.
Keep the steering pointed straight ahead in loose sand, more than a touch of steering input and the tyres act like blades and you come to a stop (again)
Do bring sand ladders. You are daft if you don’t plus your teammates will be miffed with you when you are sat in the comfy driver seat and they are sweating whilst pushing you out the ever-sinking sand.   
If in a 4WD do not offer to pull other cars out. Most civilian 4x4’s are not capable of dragging a full-sized car out of the sand. You are not being selfish but simply the clutch on 4WDs is the weakest link and you may screw your own car helping others who should really use the human sweat of the group to push. 
Try to cut your own path as the more cars that drive on the same bit the more sinky it becomes, plus 5 cars wide makes for an awesome photograph.
Stop for your own mini group only otherwise we have a mass bundle of cars running together that causes further chaos. A beep beep, rude hand gesture and some filming is more than sufficient as you pass your stranded evening drinking partners.

TEAM PLAYERS 
Obviously, you understand the need for each team member to co-operate.  But teams need to co-operate with one another too.  You will often be travelling in subgroups of about 5 vehicles.  Cooperation is particularly important in the desert.  
The spirit of the Challenge is about coping with the pressures of local corruption, with travelling in a group of very diverse people and with coaxing very fragile cars across a long, difficult route.  Take some humility and perspective and remember we are guests in foreign lands, watched by the locals, other groups, the media, and each other so DO NOT do stupid things that you wouldn't normally do in your home country.  It could jeopardize the future of the Challenge.
If you see or hear on the WhatsApp chat of fellow travellers in trouble, try to assist even if that means turning back.  You never know if it will be your turn later on.  
Personal luggage needs to be considered, as if you need a lift with 4 suitcases it puts pressure on everyone, but a passenger with a single rucksack is easy to accommodate. It is worst case scenario, but traditionally we expect a low percentage of vehicles to be “non-finishers”, and the Challenge is to get to the destination somehow – in your own car is just a bonus! 
A team should be made up of a maximum of 3 people, adding extra passengers just because you have a spare seat the day before departure may seem okay, but when you’re in the desert and looking to share out your people to other teams, it can be awkward, either looking for a space, or unable to offer a space. This is a team event…… only in so much as no-one gets left behind!
RISK 
So far, we have had no deaths but came close to disaster in Jan 2007 when a team stopped to take a picture in the sand in the desert and lost their group.  They only survived as their mobile worked and they were able to ask other teams to hire a helicopter to rescue them. Since this time a fair bit of housework has been done to make your journey as real but as safe as possible. So when we ask you to buy walkie talkies, Sim cards, Sand ladder, etc  it is for a reason. I will explain the full story over an evening beer / glass of wine.  
Basic rules are as follows:

              Do not go off piste alone or without a guide – Mines?
Carry lots of water, fuel and sand ladders
Assume mobiles will not work
Do not tow cars out as you may fry your clutch…pushing is safer
All teams must keep the rear car in their mirror and use the mirror every 15 seconds to prevent the last car being left behind
If all is lost, stay with your car….do not try to walk out.
Stay in walkie talkie communication. Have enough batteries for these days.



USEFUL RESOURCES
Information
Web link (if applicable)
Chris Scott 4WD information for North Africa.  
 www.sahara-overland.com
The Lonely Planet 
 www.shop.lonelyplanet.com
European health insurance for UK residents and form EHIC
 
You can also find health clinics at Trailfinders, Nomad Travel Centres and the Hospital of Tropical Disease.
 www.Trailfinders.com
www.nomadtravel.co.uk


Sand driving.
 YouTube
Your home country Foreign & Commonwealth Office.  
Look at their “FCO pages” for information and advice about Morocco, Western Sahara, Mauritania, and Senegal. Click on ‘travel advice’ then ‘travel advice by country’.




For about £8 to £16 each you can get printed maps.  
Easy to pick up the European ones in WH Smiths or well-known bookshops. The others we got online. 
For short term insurance for fly ins
 www.sterling-insurance.co.uk
Ferries to Europe: 
 www.brittany-ferries.co.uk buying them as soon as they are released as they are cheaper. 
Ferries to Morocco
 FRS / Baleria 

SHOPPING HOURS
Shopping hours as a general rule are Mon-Thurs 9.30am-10pm with siesta 13.00 to 15.00. Friday is a religious day so shops shut between 12.00 and 16.30.  On Saturday and Sunday, only food shops tend to be open.  Bakeries open early morning and sell fresh bread baked on the premises so great choice for breakfast in every town and village. That said it is prudent to be on the road to get the maximum out of the day. Again, travelling after dark should be avoided. Waiting for a café to open may well cost you hours in lost time. Military ration packs make for a good hearty breakfast.
From a 2019/23 Oddball motors team:  We attached a metal pan near the manifold under the bonnet. A ration pack breakfast takes about 60 miles to heat up, dinner about 80 miles! We ate like kings thanks to manifold cooking.

BREAKDOWNS IN EUROPE.
Good luck. We know how difficult it is to get seen in a garage straight away.
Best get to the Hotel Meson de Sancho Tarifa and hope that someone more knowledgeable than me is on hand out in the carpark. Many cars have been fixed here. Try to advise on WhatsApp what the failing part it. In previous years we have been lucky enough to get someone to source a part before you limp in.

BREAKDOWNS IN AFRICA.
 If you breakdown in Africa many locals will try to point you in the right direction of how to get it fixed. This is most helpful. Time is not on your side. Local knowledge is. If they go out of their way to take you to a garage maybe by following them on a bicycle, moped or indeed towing you then please thank them and reward them for their time. They could quite easily have left you stranded. You haven’t been robbed you have been helped.
When you get to the repair shop that might look like a falling down old building don’t be shocked. This is actually a fully working premises that will be able to help or if not point to a friend that can.
Unlike in Europe where we have to book your car in and wait days for a slot and then even longer for parts to turn up. The chances are you will be helped straight away. They can see you are obviously not from round these parts. The stickers give the game away as to where you are going. 
Now this priority service is going to cost you. Don’t be surprised if it is alongside the Euro costs. Try to negotiate a price in advance. Though if your bartering skills offend then they will down tools and continue with the job they were already doing. You’ve blown it.
I have been ushered to the front of the queue may times and the repair has usually cost me half a day in time, an overnight hotel at the location and an early start the next day.
At one breakdown I had 3 guys working on my car with a 4TH driving off for some considerable time to go and get the spare parts. In the meantime we were given some chairs and sat out the front talking to many passers and enjoying the company of the owners 10 year old daughter and 5 year old son, The time flew by and we were back up and running after 5 hours. This cost me 350 euros. It did feel a bit top heavy at the time but that’s because i was thinking in African prices, which if you check the price of oil and parts it is not too far off home prices. 



BREAKDOWNS IN THE DESERT.
It is more than likely going to be a radiator, hose, belt or tyre. Anything more sinister like a head gasket failure or complete engine failure we will get you to the main road. From there Dahid will arrange for recovery to get you to Chami. Where there are repair shops. If it can be fixed here, then great. If not it might need onward transport to Nouakchott where parts may be available. If it is dead then now is the time to make arrangements for disposal and clearance out of your passport and get you a lift back in a car with the main group.






The Road Book Part 2
BANJUL IS CALLING. FERRIES TO GET THERE. For Euro teams you are already a step ahead of us across the water. For Uk teams there are plenty of options to get to France or a few to get directly to Spain. 

Possible routes to France /Spain
The choice is yours. If you have time then leave a day or two earlier than the road book suggests and break up the long drive through France and Spain. If you have left work Friday evening, then get down to a Ferry port and take the overnight ferry. Saves on accommodation and gets you on the move quicker for the next morning.
Some take the Plymouth to Santander option. I did this in 2025. It has its fors and against. 
For = Sit at the bar and look out the window thinking how pleasant this is while others are driving through France and Spain. 
Against = Your smugness may end quickly if the Ferry isn’t running and you have to belt it back to another ferry port or you may spill your drink as it becomes a bit choppy as you turn into the Bay of Biscay. 
Channel Tunnel then drive through France and Spain
Dover to Calais Ferry
Poole to Cherbourg Ferry
Portsmouth to St Malo or Le Havre Ferry or Cherbourg
Portsmouth to Santander or Bilbao Ferry
DRIVE THROUGH FRANCE
400+ miles from Calais to Bayonne / Biarritz which is the suggested night stop.  However, anticipate teams stopping where they choose - the party atmosphere will come later. Much of the motorway is Péage (toll) where credit cards are fine. Get a card like Starling with a Euro account attached to it so you don’t get battered for exchange rates and handling fees. Unless there is something you particularly want to see up Calais way then I would spend the time travelling to Portsmouth and going across from there. It shortcuts a whole chunk of France.   
Plenty of options now on Booking.com See how far you get and book something on the move.
DRIVE THROUGH SPAIN
Another 700+ miles are ahead of you now the scenery and temperature will start to improve.  It is motorway all the way and you will soon hit the Pyrenees with their potential for snow and ice.  There are toll roads (Péage) towards Tarifa and Algeciras. We stopped in Salamanca on the way down. Very historic and pretty place. Nice food. Nightmare one way system but worth the effort.
FERRY TO BILBAO/SANTANDER
As mentioned above. For those that wish to save a long drive across Europe the Portsmouth Bilbao / Santander.  They are however pricey but you do save over 600 miles of driving.  The crossing takes 48 hours. The standard single fare is circa £450 for 2 plus car one way with cabin. Do book early as ferries do fill up.
The problem with these ferries is that crossings normally occur on the wrong days to match a seamless arrival at Tarifa.  It depends whether you have a deadline and whether you want to arrive at Tarifa for the full two days.  If you want to use this option do check the timings.  

GETTING TO SOUTHERN SPAIN 
Your destination is Tarifa in southern Spain where the Challenge hotel is located.  Your route and timings for getting there is entirely down to you.  Three days is comfortable from the ferry ports in northwest France.  Two days is achievable with a couple of long drives.  
TARIFA
You’ve made it to southern Spain!  Your objective now will be to get to the Challenge hotel (see below).  It is the first time you will meet all the other teams and it is worth staying 2 nights here, leaving at the crack of dawn after night 2. 1st night of arrival = fancy dress / shit shirts / bad blouses night. Start as we mean to go on and have a bit of fun. This is the best place to work out who “your kind of people” are. Work out if you are part of the “early to bed early to rise” or the “last out the bar last to the car” group. When on the road you will then work out If this was a good decision and you may also change from the quicker to slower driving groups as the days progress. You’ll work it out.
Accommodation:  Hotel Restaurant Mesón de Sancho
(34) 956 684 900
www.mesondesancho.com


  Best to book this hotel for the 2 nights you need...rarely does it get full but you never know.
The hotel is located at the southern limit of the Parque Natural de los Alcornocales.  It is about midway between Tarifa and Algeciras on the north side of the winding N5-E340 (Carretera Nacional Cádiz Málaga: the main highway from Cádiz to Málaga).  
From a 2023 team:  We booked directly with the hotel as all the bookings.com rooms had all sold to other teams. We sent them our credit card details in an email which we found quite odd however that worked out fine. Though they only took our details for holding the room we thought they had taken the room charge. They then wanted payment for the room as we checked out. We checked back via our online statements and payment had not been taken. This was mainly an English / Spanish communication breakdown and nothing sinister. Make sure you get breakfast included when you book via email as that is extra. They have continental breakfast available for the early morning departure.
You will have free time to sort yourself out in Tarifa and it is worth taking some time to explore.   The old town is worth a visit with narrow cobbled streets and small bars: very different from the new town.  There is a tyre centre at the bottom of the hill and a general mechanic in town.
GIBRALTAR
Gibraltar is worth a visit.  If there is a traffic jam to get to the rock, just park outside and walk in like you are entering a theme park. Dave knows of a mechanic who works out of an abandoned car park. He is not cheap but he is available at very short notice.
Tax free fuel. Though it is still cheaper in Morocco. 
A number of shops and supermarkets can be found in Algeciras for stocking up on most things.
There is a Decathlon outdoor shop on the way to Gibraltar, just after Algeciras (best place to buy sleeping bags, tents, etc if you are unorganised enough to have not already bought them).  Ctra. Cádiz-Málaga, 3, Los Barrios, Cádiz.  This is your last chance to get camping equipment.  Two teams found out the hard way that there seems to be no outdoor shops in Morocco and that supermarkets don’t stock tents out of season. So best advice is to buy it all before you leave home.
 
FERRY TICKETS TO MOROCCO
It is easy to get your tickets from southern Spain to Morocco online well before you leave for Europe.  Best advice is to do that. Book up early and get the 09:00 crossing. Too early and it will be full of lorries, too late and its full of general traffic holding up the immigration process the other side. You might want to wait until you hear what other teams are doing via WhatsApp then agree on what port and ferry to use (to avoid having to try and meet up later in Morocco to all going to different ports and at different times). 
Your options are:
Algeciras - Tangier Med: Preferred option. On this route the immigration process takes place on the ferry making life easier. In your sticker pack you will already have the immigration card. The Algeciras ferry is more reliable and tickets are easily obtainable at the port at the FRS office.  The easiest hassle-free way from Spain to Morocco is the Algeciras to Tangier Med route.  All the shipping companies have ticketing offices in the Terminal at Algeciras Port.  You need to take the passports of everyone in the car and the registration number of the car in order to book.  In January 2025 the cost for the ferry was 129 € for a car and 28€ per person. Once in Tangier Med. (Morocco) you will go through a couple of security sections where the car will go through a scanner and then the guards will ask you to open your car and may search it. Then you proceed to the porter cabins that sell car insurance, money exchange and sim cards for phone. 
Tarifa – Tangier:  The crossing is by catamaran so if it is windy this will not sail or it might be slightly delayed until less choppy, so the Algeciras ferry is a safer bet.  The immigration process will occur on the ferry. The jetfoil takes about 45 minutes.  Customs clearance in Tangier takes about 2 hours.  You may get pulled in for a Scanner search some get waved through. There is an ATM immediately beyond the barrier.  It’s wise to get cash before going to the insurance bureau (hard currencies only). These are directly behind you a concrete building.
Algeciras – Ceuta:  This route used to take ages to get through immigration on the other side. However, after an international immigration incident between Morocco and Spain they have cleaned this crossing up immensely. This crossing is the cheapest of the options. Though it spits you out further along the top of Morocco and will take extra time to meet back up with the teams crossing at Tarifa.  Ceuta is still part of Spain much like Gibraltar is a British overseas territory, so the customs post is a fair way out of town.  I cannot give any further information as I haven’t been through here since revamp.


 
IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES
This is simple and straightforward and done on the ferry. Look for the queue!  
You must get your immigration card. This will be sent to you in the welcome pack. However, if you have lost it then it is sometimes handed out when buying your ticket in Spain, or found on the ferry information counter at passport control.  The form is in French with English subtext.  Under 'going to' write any big Moroccan town like Fez or Marrakech.  For 'coming from' put the European port you've just arrived from (Algeciras, Almeria, etc).  For an 'address in Morocco' put the hotel you are headed to. Do not fill out the back of the form.
If you have visited Morocco before (on your current passport) you will have a ‘CIN’ number in your passport (black ink and stamped near entry stamp).  This CIN number is the one you should use on your immigration card as it remains your personal number for every visit to Morocco you will take.  (Good luck reading it though, it like doctors handwriting!) If you have not been to Morocco before you will be allocated one when you get your passport stamped.
TEMPORARY VEHICLE IMPORTATION 
The D16 and TVIP are no longer available online. We are travelling on Passavant’s not carnets as this is a one way trip. When leaving the ferry, head in your car to customs by following the exit signs.  You will reach lanes with booths for registering your vehicle.  You will need:
Passport.
Driving Licence.
Vehicle registration document (V5)
You will have your documents taken away and some cars may be directed to a large x-ray machine.  If your car is scanned, you need to re-join the original queue to obtain your import document.  It seems bewildering to have your passport and car documents taken away but be assured they will be returned to you with the small white card temporary import document eventually.  DO NOT lose this card and make sure they have given you the one with your vehicle on it. Take a photo of it. This is your ‘vehicle entry permit’ without it you are doomed to drive the highways and byways of Morocco forever!  You need this to be able to cross the border into Mauritania.

DRONES. Scanner warning. They do not like drones. You will get asked multiple times if you have drones. They are very fearful of drones. Say you have them and they will be confiscated. Say you haven’t got a drone and you have you will get fined and everything thoroughly searched on the floor outside your car.  If you have one and it comes to pieces. Then scatter the parts all over the car or cars. Be very careful when using a drone the military will hunt you down. You will get away with using one in the desert but that’s about all. 

CAR INSURANCE, SIM & MONEY
You should be able to buy local insurance (assurance frontier) at the port of entry We recommend purchasing it here. Park in the main carpark. Use your time wisely and get your passenger to get a sim card. They will help you install it. Get a fairly big credit loaded to it as you are in Morocco for a long while. Also getting money exchanged at the big bureau de change will save you time and hassle. The rate is not the best nor is it the worst but driving into a country that uses physical money is very wise.  
At Tangier Med is a row of small cabins. Insurance office you can buy for two weeks or one month.  Two weeks cost about €55 / 65 for a standard saloon car. There are a couple of money changers charging the same rate. You can argue the rate a bit and then walk away. They usually come back for a minimal increase but do the maths yourself or they will count out the old rate! There are also 2 ATMs but be warned one of our challengers card got swallowed. Wait and watch another traveller use it first. Its best to change your money first and then use local to buy your insurance and sim. There are multiple sellers walking around selling the sims, it looks dodgy as they haven’t got an office but they is legit. Make sure you have an unlocked phone or it won’t work and check the sim works before leaving of course.


THE ROUTE SOUTH / HOTELS 

Cutting your route down through the huge country of Morocco and further has now been made easier with the invention of Booking.com or Agoda. You can now plot your route and know how much it is going to cost. The added advantage on bookings is that it will load it to your sat nav via Google maps. This does of course take away some of the free roaming side of things and you may miss out on the most authentic place in town but if you keep away from the big global chains then locals can still benefit from your tourist money. 
Here is an oddity, we turned up in Fez and another team tagged along with us. We had booked. They hadn’t so they got a price upon walk in. The price was higher than the bookings.com rate. No matter how we tried to give them the equal money .. they weren’t having it. So, they went outside and booked for less on the app walked back inside and got the same room. Always check the app price first as on the day is it can be less than the walk-in rate
Below is a list of destinations that seems a bit scatter bombed if you look at it on a map. These are places we have stayed in in the past. Generally lower end cheap places but perfectly adequate for a night’s stay but now we have booking.com then these are just a few amongst many.

Plotting your route. Take a look at the names of places below. Many are joined up into routes. Not all will work given our time frame so take small sections and put them into GOOGLE MAPS. The one that has multiple addition options. It will give you a rough idea as to how long it will take. Adjust the towns and cities in the drop down option and it will spit out a doable route. if you put in Marrakech >Fez>Todra gorge> up the Tiz and Test and then down the next day to Tan Tan Plague it will show it’s not possible. Remove Marrakesh then Fez >Todra> Tiz up and down is doable.
Or Marrakech and from the top drive down the Tiz is possible. Once on the coast road then it’s pretty much Tan Tan plage (AKA El Ouatia), Boujdour, Dakhla however if Boujdour is unavailable then Laayoune, Dakhla is the other option. But getting down through Morocco there are loads of options. My advice would just be to stay off the main motorway / toll road to Casablanca. It is fast and smooth but a bit like driving in Europe. But hey if you want to go to - “all the Gin joints in all the towns in all the world” then that is the quickest way to get there. 

I digress. You have made it to Morocco and now need a plan as to where you are going to go in the time available.  Hopefully you spent some time on WhatsApp before leaving or in Tarifa with your other groups getting ideas together.  Watch out for speed enforcement as you go through Morocco, there are lots of places where you’ll see a 80kph sign, followed within a hundred meters by a 60kph sign.  You’re probably best just keeping it around 60 kph when you are in between towns.  Further south you go the more checkpoints you will find so beware.  Also, if you cross a solid white line road marking, you may be fined 100€.
I bought a digital KPH neon display and stuck it to my dashboard. Not the heads up display one as the sun affects them. This was like a green neon big digital watch display. So simple to look at. Our UK dash versions are far too small to look at. Oh, those more fortunate Euro teams don’t have this added first world problem.
 POSSIBLE ROUTES:
Chefchouen is a beautiful town, many buildings are painted blue and ideal for a stop in a decent character hotel or at the campsite though I would say it’s cold and misty up the top in Chef.  There are many small hotels in the town. Try to stay within the walled city. Let locals assist you with parking and look after your car for a small tip.
The Kef Toghobeit Cave, one of the deepest caves in Africa  is nearby.  
After Chefchouen, you might want to head south through Meknes, pop in to see the monkeys at Azrou, Midelt to a hotel that looks like a fort in the Ziz Gorge about 30km before Errachidia.  Following day on to Errachidia, Goulmima and turn right at Tinghir to see the Todra Gorge (worth the extra 10km detour) before Boumalne Dadès and the Dadès valley to Ouarzazate.  Following day take 10 km detour to at Benhaddou, Tizi-n-Tichka . All of these might be a far stretch but put some of them into google maps to see where they show on a map and plot from there and grab some sections and thread them together.

Pistes from Erfoud to Tagounite: It is a superb adventure.  At Tagounite, take the piste to Foum-Zguid (pronounced Formsgate) or head left up to Zagora and Agdz.  Just after Agdz, take the piste to Tasla, heading for Tazenakht then the road towards Taliouine before taking your pick of pistes down to Tata and Akka.  It is awesome driving and a real test of human and machine.  You won’t see a European face for days.  You won’t believe some of the stuff you’re negotiating and there’s a real question mark over the outcome! Grab some of these sections and weave them into a route. 
From Akka, the road to Geulmim and Tan-Tan gets you back on the beaten track to Laáyoune and the relatively dull drive to Dakhla.
Azrou: A strangely non Moroccan looking place,like a swiss ski town with beautiful pine trees and wild monkeys on the road. Upon leaving here Google maps got us completely lost on the way to Dades which unfolded into some exceptionally scenic gorges not shown on the map, taking us through the impressive Todra gorge. 
Dades Gorge: Nice windy roads through the Atlas Mountains into the picturesque terracotta coloured gorge. Lots of little hotels. 
Ouarzazate: Huge town with large mechanic quarter on the outskirts of town. We had our failing radiator brazed there.
Over the Atlas Mountains: Perhaps the Tizi N Test pass at 6000ft to reach the coast from Marrakech.   You will fall behind but hey, You can make it up by cutting into the rest day at Dakhla.  The pass is reputed to be one of those must-do, oh-my-god-look-at-that-drop.  The road is good but single track and slow. The white peaks of the Atlas unfold in front of you and, gaining altitude, snow gets closer to the road.  In the sun the tarmac is desert-dry but out of it (and in the numbing cold) there are smooth, road-wide stretches of ice.  At the 2,100m summit you can buy a saffron-yellow Berber omelette and take in the astounding views of a road clinging to the dusty ochre mountainsides.  On the way down the corners finally disappear and it’s straight on to tacky Agadir.  If you can get further than Agadir, there are hotels with alcohol in Tiznit and Sidi Ifni.

TIZI-N-Tazatert Pass:  a great drive over the mountain and across the 7500ft Tizi-n-Tazatert pass with some super views south from the top.  Plan a day as there are only 2 hotels up on the Tiz n Test. . 
Accommodation:  Hotel Belle vue 2100m or Tizintest La Haute 2100m. I love staying up here. Aim to get here before nightfall as it is pretty dodgy in the dark. Get there early and have a drink outside and take in the magnificent view. It is not recommended to continue the descent in the dark as there are some precipitous drops.
Leave the main Tinghir to Boumalne-du-Dades road (the N10) at N31 21'50 W005 54'51 and head south on a good dirt road that soon becomes tarmac.  It goes through some fertile valleys and over a couple of small passes.
At N31 12'02 W005 44'37 turn right off the blacktop and start the fun... It is signposted to Knob/Nkob and is a track into the mountains.  At the top of the pass and in the middle of nowhere is a ‘hotel’.
About 3 miles before Knob there is a moonscape like plateau where you can actually get some real speed up!  You reach the edge of Knob at N30 53'02 W005 52'17.  You can camp at N31 03'27 W005 46'43.
MARRAKESH or FES
Marrakesh:  See the Djemaa el Fna but do not eat there if you are skint.  Also, the Medina and the Musee de Marrakech, go shopping in the last hypermarkets (incl. Carrefour) for 2,000 miles.  There are many hotels and Riads in Marrakech so plenty of choice.
Fes:  wonderful Souk.  Lots of noise from the metal beaters.  The tanneries are a must. Again, lots of small hotels in traditional riads. Your choice on Marrakech or Fez will depend on how you cut your route previously. 

ESSAOUIRA
If you choose to hug the coast and not go into the Atlas Mountains, Essaouria is a delightful, picturesque town. The fish market is fabulous and the restaurants full of wonderful dishes.  Great shopping too – art and antiques.  Try to stay in a traditional riad hotel inside the city wall if at all possible. Game of Thrones was filmed here.
AGADIR
A large modern city with charter flights to the UK is nothing special.  The campsite off Boulevard Mohammed 5 is full of camper vans, straight out of a David Lynch film, with artificial grass verandas, fairy lights.  There's a cash 'n' carry just outside town N30°23'18" W9°30'43"
However, if you do end up here, on the southern outskirts of the town is a huge scrap dump if you need car spares.  It is an extraordinary place which shuts around 5pm.
TAROUDANT
Near Agadir, is a very relaxed place to shop and visit.  The tanneries and souk are friendly with reasonable prices and no hassle from polite people.

TIZNIT
A town of 80,000, surrounded by mud walls and famous for its jewellery and metal work souvenirs. The jewellery souk entrance is off the main square but very narrow. 
Accommodation:  Lonely Planet mentions a campsite on the beach at Aglou Plage 15k/9 miles north of town but this is untested by prior teams.  There is no need to return to Tiznit from the campsite as you can head south down the coast (via Ifni) and hit the main road again. 
Hôtel Atlas at Mirleft (40k/25 miles southwest from Tiznet) comes well recommended too.
Feedback from 2018:  Hotel Tiznit: We ended up in Tiznit due to mechanical failure.  There’s nothing exciting about the place, but it does have an excellent mechanic’s quarter with very competent chaps and spares shops close by.  A 3-hour job with 3 guys working on it cost 30 EUR.  There is an assortment of hotels on the main roundabout, we picked Hotel Tiznit for no particular reason. It was clearly off-season, as the rather large hotel was completely empty.  The rooms were big and clean.  We did spot a cockroach in the bathroom but weren’t put off. It was about 30 EUR for the night.  The bar downstairs was clearly popular and was wafting dope smoke up to our windows.  We decided to go out for dinner… We went to restaurant du Carrefour, which was the only documented restaurant in town, and conveniently just around the corner.  The food was good, the waiter pleasant and unassuming.
SIDI IFNI
It’s a small, pretty blue and white tourist resort town with superb decaying architecture, an amazing contrast to the frantic hubbub of Marrakech and Rabat.  Take the time hug the coast road on the way in. After -3oc up in the Tiz n Test we arrived to 18oc, time to get the shorts on! Nice hotels and camping available. Hotel Ait Baamrane on the seafront had western food and a well-stocked bar.
Accommodation:  Hotel Suerte-Loca is run by Rachid and Halika and is delightful.  
7 Avenue Moulay Youssef, Sidi Ifni 85200 Morocco 
0212 5288-75350
There is also an RV campsite at the beach, but it is asphalt.

INTO WESTERN SAHARA (disputed)
Remember that you will need your fiches in Western Sahara.  You are now in pure desert and the days are warm, the tarmac hot but you are chilled out.  
This part of the journey you are now on a single road headed one way. There is very little deviation from this main road. So inevitably you will have to stay in one of these towns.

TAN TAN PLAGE (or Tin Tin) there’s not a lot here but a few restaurants and the beach is mediocre. However, there are a few hotels and an ATM.  Tan Tan plage, is uninteresting but you will see the first shipwrecks north of here.  Car repairs are available here.
Accommodation: Hotel Marwa is nothing special. Wouldn’t serve breakfast before 10am so we brewed up in the reception on our camping stove.
Equinox over the road is better if you can get a room. 
South of here petrol becomes scarce so make sure you fill up when you see it.

TARFAYA Nothing much here. Fuel, a few cafes. 2 hotels and a couple of apartments. Fortress in the sea, Casa del  mar and museum of Antoine de saint exupery. If you have time push on to Laayoune. 

LAÂYOUNE Arabic for the Springs. Largest city in the disputed territory named Western Sahara
Accommodation:  2025 a lot of our teams stayed at Hotel Beauport, cheap and cheerful, friendly staff and restaurant attached. Also, a mechanic out the back across the road.

ROAD TO DAKHLA
This is a long dull drive on good asphalt (520km / 325 miles) along the skeleton coast.  Some of the beached ships are well worth photographing.  The only town of note is Boujdour. 
BOUJDOUR. Quite a western town with shops and cafes and weird statues.
Accommodation: Camping- car Sahara line Boujdour This an average campsite here with cabins from 10 euros a night, good stop off point before Dakhla. If looking to break up the journey. There is a 1 star hotel up in the town, I did stay there but can’t find it on any booking app it’s that good.

 DAKHLA
Airport. In recent years this has become a great place for passengers to fly in or fly out. For those tight on time this place is a challenge deal maker. Please do make Dave aware of the name switch as is creates a stack more paperwork. But the challenge is also on me to make sure you have an awesome adventure.

I would recommend stopping here and using this as a rest day too. Last place to stock up on booze (you have to go find it down a back street but it’s safe enough) and decent food. There is a free campsite just on the left by the checkpoint or decent accommodation in town. It is just a bit of waste land that travelling hippies and RVs Park up on. There is a hotel with a bar and food there too. I slept on the beach one year. Was coooool man.
Dakhla is usually a cheap place to buy jerry cans and Jelabas (the long robes with the tasselled hoods).  You may see UN troops around as there is an armed services hospital here.  There are no more big shops from here onwards. (Well almost true, basics are available in Nouakchott and you will get bread in villages).  
Dakhla’s industries are sardines, octopus and tourism.  Activities include superb kite surfing and wind surfing. It is becoming a high-end surfer dude hang out around the top end of the beach. Down in the town everything is quite standard. Plenty to choose from on Booking.com.
Nice modern restaurants which serve alcohol.
Accommodation:  The campsite is a walled enclosure on the left as you come into town. They have blockhouse-like rooms too. 
Hotel Dakhla Sur Mer is circa 45€ for 2 people sharing including breakfast. Comes previously recommended.
Hotel Dakhla Ville we stayed this year (2024) 2 people with breakfast 40€ (opposite lovely international restaurant /trendy bar)



INTO MAURITANIA/ FEES 
All teams MUST meet at Hotel Barbas about 60 miles before the Mauritanian border. DAVE will get a thread going on the facebook page regarding room requirements and he will  reserve on behalf of the group, Though you pay on arrival. No point trying to contact Omar the owner as he speaks fairly good English but cannot read or write it so emailing gets ignored. Prices are about 28 euros per room and you will pay this on your arrival.

Accommodation:  Hotel Barbas
                 0212 5288 19699
                 Lamhairiz Aousserd, 73000 Bir Gandouz

It is ABSOLUTLEY ESSENTIAL to gather everyone here to go to the border in a convoy.  This helps the fixer Dahid and his team enormously. Dave will have already let him know the date you are arriving at Hotel Barbas so he can be on hand to collect fees. This used to be done at separate window huts along the way and would take up so much time to do with stacks of bribes required. Now we have streamlined it, so we do the collection on behalf of them and cut out all the faffing around in advance of us turning up.   Mauritanian border, Customs fees, Police fees, National Park fees. You name it there is now a fee for it. Mauritania has many fees. All legitimate. This is a very poor country and you are a tourist. For this you will pay for the pleasure of passing. 
DESERT FEES / PARK FEES/ OTHER FEES to account for.
Dave will post the ever-changing government fee structure for the coming year on the Facebook page but for your accounting here are the 2025 charges.
Mauritanian visa 55 euros per person.
Mauritanian car insurance 30 euros per car
Passavant 10 euros per car 
Tourist tax 10 euros per person
Diawling national park 5 euros per person
Banc d’Arguin National Park fee 30 euros per person 
Diama exit fee 10 euros per person
Dave will also post the desert guide fees on the Facebook page. 

This is the Dakar / Banjul challenge. The mission is to get to the Gambia and have a lot of fun on the way. So why not take the desert route then …. Well, we are passing …… lets go explore it (with assistance from those who know what they are doing of course). 
For your accounting here is the 2025 charges for the Dahid desert run.
Assistance crossing the border
3 Days desert guide fee
3 Evening meal BBQ 
Hire of Hi lux for Emergency assistance & fuel (tow back to the road only)
125 euros per person. 

Whilst I am mentioning it and you are totting up costs, the next big and final one incoming is for the Senegal one car pass. That’s 170 euros per car.
Which includes insurance and Passavant. I will speak more about this in the Senegal section.

ALL FEES ARE EUROS ONLY. So don’t spend it all on booze in Dakhla.

All the teams must leave Hotel Barbas early in the morning. This is a really long day with even longer queues at the border if we don’t get there early.  Leave the hotel at 6am and get to the border still in the dark.  Make a cup of tea / have a snooze before the border opens around 9am.  This way you avoid the queue of cars / lorries that will have built up overnight.  The Mauritanian border closes for lunch.
Mauritania is a “dry” country, so alcohol is unavailable.  We suggest if you take alcohol to the border crossing, it risks being confiscated if your car is searched, so stash it well.
Border Formalities:  The group requirement changes yearly. So standby for advice. Sometimes they want us as a group. Other times going through in dribs and drabs. The customs officers will require all passports and these will be dealt with slowly.  It is important that your car documents are stamped.  It appears chaotic, but it is relatively smooth.
Once you are clear of the Moroccan/Western Sahara customs / border control, it is then into no man’s land – a drive of 300m of (allegedly) mined desert before you get to Mauritania. There is a track to the Mauritanian border so don’t deviate from the track.
Dave will have sent Dahid a list of everyone coming through the border and Dahid will have gone ahead on foot to meet you on the Mauritanian side.  He will have received all information ahead of time ready for the paperwork to be completed.  This will save you hours at the border and give you more time in the desert should you wish to go off roading.
It would be a good idea to have a copy of your V5 to hand and sometimes the cc of your car is required, along with the VIN number.  
Dave, Dahid and his team will direct you where to go and what to do.  Expect chaos and a fair bit of queuing. Locals pushing in is frequent so we need to stand firm not do not keep walking off and breaking the chain, lose your place and your smaller group will not be able to move forward.  Avoid the awful toilets if possible and there are no seats.  You will have your photo and fingerprints taken and 55€ for the visa (this may have already been collected at the hotel Barbas)
There are touts selling local currency and local SIM cards at reasonable rates. Test that it works as you pay. BUY one per car. From here onwards it can get messy very quickly. Be that the desert or roadway. By the time you come out of the desert we have another long day to the border. This is where your patience is of vital importance as is being able to communicate.  
Please respect Dahid’s advice and help – he is a good friend of the challenges.
If anyone is not going off road into the desert with Dahid and his team, let him know.  These teams will be given priority to get through the border formalities so they can get underway.


EXTREMELY IMPORTANT 
The Mauritanian E Visa must have been obtained in advance. We can no longer just turn up and expect to get one on the border. As mentioned earlier in the document along with links get your E visa sooner rather than later. Bring 2 colour copies of the paperwork and make sure they are not folded through the QR code.

Have a colour scan copy of your E VISA for Dahid. 
Have a colour scan copy of your driving licence for Dahid. 
Have a colour scan copy of your passport for Dahid. 
Have a colour scan copy of your car document for Dahid.
Mark your team number and surname bold & clearly on the top right corner of everything.
These will be put inside your passport when handing them over. Now we wait.


MAURITANIAN OFF ROAD 
Guides through the sand:  Whilst we say unsupported we are not totally stupid. We cannot just drive into a desert and think that everything will be fine. The Desert is an awesome place to visit but it must be done properly to get the maximum enjoyment. For many years now we have been using Dahid, he is a desert guide and registered Mauritanian tour operator. He is a superstar. Trust him with your life!  Note:  For the best experience we will split into groups of about 5 cars arranged previously at the Barbas hotel. – if you all stick in one big group, the going will be slow. In order to progress the best way through the desert we make sure the groups have capable and less capable cars in it. Same with people. Those that can push and dig mixed with those that will point the steering wheel in the right direction. Age is no restriction nor is digging capabilities. We all have our strengths in the desert and everyone can bring something to the table. That might even be a well stashed warm beer. We all meet up every evening for the group BBQ and camping. This may sound obvious but there are no hotels in the desert so bring a tent.

  Dahid will provide guides in advance. So please answer all questions in advance that come up on the Facebook / WhatsApp. It has been done in order to save you time and money. Start answering these questions with only days to go and you are on your own.
Feedback from 2018:  Dahid was fantastic, both in getting us through the Mauritanian border process and in guiding us through the desert; he definitely earned his money and I would recommend him to anyone.
The rate is as mentioned above. 2 days in the sandy desert and 1 day on the totally desolate beach run. The tide is on the turn at the rocky headland so we stop for lunch and a swim. We camp overnight. Evening BBQ and campfire is included in the price. Take your own food for breakfast and lunch. Water is essential.

DESERT FOR REAL – OR NOT! 
It is important to be in 2 groups at the Mauritanian border… These will be split down into the smaller pre-arranged groups once out the other side, but for the “formalities”, it needs to be just 2 groups….
Basically, the ‘Desert’ group and the ‘Road’ group. We need to know this by November. Dahid has to arrange guides and BBQ food, so a head count is required.
Road group will need to meet up with the desert group at the roundabout by the American Embassy at 09.30am in order for us to travel again as a group to the Diama border. 
 This is where we collect the Senegal 1 car pass. Details later in the road book.
Once you are across the border, if not off roading with Dahid, note that there may be small piles of rocks in the desert alongside the road to Nouakchott.  These apparently indicate where mines may be in the sand so please stick to the tarmac! 
The road options are:
Nouadhibou We used to say you should avoid Nouadhibou, but things seem to be improving.  Many cars have no number plates and there are no police but somehow you feel safe.  Should you go there all cars are so shagged, it is worth a picture but be discreet and perhaps ask permission first.  Not a lot to do here but a decent Turkish restaurant.


Accommodation:  
House Valencia Hotel and apartments. You have never seen such ridiculously oversized accommodation, 2 living rooms, 3 bedrooms. Ask for something smaller and it’s still the same price.  Great in town location. 
Nouadhibou guest house came highly recommended by a team from 2024. 30 euros with brekkie. Aussie owners and there is a lovely Spanish restaurant down the road apparently. We however stayed there this year 2025 and the owners were away so breakfast was unavailable. We had a kitchenette so made our own.
Nouakchott (via tarmac):  Follow the road!  This is a good road and straightforward all bar a battered section in the middle.  We suggest you take this route, albeit a tad dull. Make sure you have enough fuel. You did fill up your cans outside the Hotel Barbas right? There is a small town that doesn’t show up on maps called Chami with cafes and fuel if you’re desperate, halfway to Nouakchott. Its very likely that if you have broken down in the desert that this is where the tow truck will take you to for repairs.
Feedback from 2018:  Auberge Samiraa (on the northwest edge of Nouakchott) was a perfectly functional place to land after two nights in the desert. We had to bail as our car was failing. We got it fixed. Should have put a sump guard on. Anyway Clean, dormitory-style rooms, space for camping, 5 showers (with hot water!!) available, plus cold soda and water for sale at reception.  
Feedback from 2024: After a night in the desert we had to make the decision to drive to Nouakchott as our car was failing and needed fixing in a proper garage. We stayed in a more up market guest house called Arabesk. It was very nice and the staff were super helpful, even accompanying me to the garage to translate. 55 euros with breakfast. Pricey but very large super modern room and pool was worth it after the sand of desert and stress of a naughty car.  
Nouakchott (via the desert and coast):  If you have joined Dahid for some off roading, this is the likely route you will take. When leaving the border, you will peel off from the road and drive into the sand, beware it is very sandy/soft.  If all goes well, you will be making it to the big dune for a night of camping in the actual DESERT. Getting there is an education in driving, staying there is an experience. The next morning it’s early to rise. We are off. More sand to explore. The route takes you south through the Banc d’Arguin National Park and to Nouâmghâr on the coast.  Expect soft sand.  This will be your first experience of all day changeable desert driving… too slow and you get stuck, too fast and you do unspeakable things to your suspension and exhaust.  Roof racks hate this bit and may collapse.  Use ratchet straps if you have them or avoid a roof rack for heavy stuff.  Guides will deflate tyres below 10psi/0.7 bar, they do it by eye so be careful not to roll a tyre off its rim. Buy your own pressure gauge is my advice. Fast(er) driving is better than very low tyre pressure. A strong team spirit is essential. Cars will continually get stuck here; it’s guaranteed!  Crossing the iron ore rail line is an experience as there is no formal crossing point.  
People have made the 320km/200 miles to Nouâmghâr in 24 hours, but it can also take 3 days, usually 2. If it gets too tricky the guide will cut a different route. Expect hours of sandy madness with lots of pushing and digging. If you all work as a team laying out the sand ladders into a long track then pushing becomes less difficult, in fact you will get it down to a fine art with everyone knowing their job! Character building and a great story for when down the pub at home. 
This is bucket list once in a lifetime stuff here. Desert driving is open for anyone daft enough to have signed up for this Dakar Challenge. You all had the same spark ignited to get out and do something completely different. So just in case you were thinking you might give it a miss I will repeat myself again.  Age or physical ability is not an inhibiting factor of the desert run. We all look out for each other, One for all and all for one. 
The guides will be in the lead car, route-finding. He may only speak French so hand movements and grunts will let you know if he is impressed with your driving. Please help him improve his English / German / Latvian etc with more than just swear words. Cars may die and be abandoned. This hasn’t happened recently as we now have assistance 4x4 to drag anything that moves back to the main road and then phone ahead for a tow truck.  But if the vultures are circling above your car, do not worry about the car having been written in your passport.  The guide will handle this in Nouakchott (hopefully!) It is customary to give him the car keys and a few hundred euros to help cross the palms of those in higher places. If your car is dead please know when you’ve been beaten. Getting emotionally attached to a car becomes a downfall of the challenge. If you are lucky enough to have been towed to the roundabout at Nouakchott by a fellow Dakarist you will have 20 minutes to action your plan. A plan that you will have had decided prior to reaching this point. We cannot afford to wait around while you decide. Critical time loss is the difference between getting into Senegal by dusk or darkness. 

LEAVE IT OR FIX IT.
Please do not rely on the good will of those to tow you another 1000 miles to the end. They may be too polite to say no but your desperation may possibly destroy their vehicle too. 

Alternatively try and limp it to the Zebrabar in Senegal where they have ramps for us to use and a mechanic on call if needed. Then repeat the above.
LEAVE IT OR FIX IT. 
Know when you are beaten.

NOUAKCHOTT (for those tight on time we have a shorter Nouakchott Challenge)
Nouakchott is bigger than Nouadhibou and a bit more civilized – although expect bumper car driving and ratted cars everywhere.  Try the Le Ksar district for spare parts or repairs.  
Fuel is readily available though not particularly good quality – you need to say how much you want to spend before the nozzle goes in. It is also expensive.
Accommodation:  There is a hostel / campsite at 18°5’35.42N 15°58’38.33W
Hotel Sabha, by the beach. N18 06.607' W 16 01.581 The hotel has mini suites and there is space for tents too.  Mini suites (4/5 people) are 25,000 Ouguiya. . It is 500m north of the fish market.  
The Emira Palace off the roundabout where the Nouadhibou Highway and Avenue Moktar Ould Daddah intersect. Reasonably priced rooms, delicious breakfast and decent WiFi.     Do stock up at the “Tata Supermarche” supermarket.
Urban Hotel Suites we can personally recommend as we have stayed there many times. Its new and modern so lacks in character but is close to the main street where there are many restaurants, shops and an ATM on the corner. Also, only minutes from the US embassy roundabout meeting point. 55 euros inc breakfast.



ONWARD JOURNEY OR HOME FROM HERE
Nouakchott challenge teams will be flying home from here - I am afraid there is no finishing line for you guys as we just don’t have the contacts for this Sorry! But this is under construction as a proper send-off destination.
Please hand your car, keys, documents and any contents to Dahid or our representative. They will make sure that the vehicle is sold to help aid the very small poor village that he was brought up in. The contents will also be distributed and will help make a difference to areas that don’t even show up on maps.  Make sure the car is written out of your passport before flying home.  Your guide will help on this.  
Full details for your onward journey are in the following sections of this Roadbook.  For both routes we suggest a place to stay at the end of your trip, both associated with where you will be dropping off your cars. If you have enjoyed the desert part then ask Dave about the 4x4 challenge. This will be a challenge that will push further into the desert for old 4x4’s only (with high and low ratio boxes) to the Oasis, Eye of the Sahara and to ride the iron ore train. Ending in Nouakchott and donating or driving home, it’s your choice. The idea is to support Dahid’s home village and help build a well. It would be good to help the other countries we travel through too.


THE ROADBOOK Part 3
NOUAKCHOTT TO BANJUL, THE GAMBIA 

TO THE ZEBRABAR IN SENEGAL but first the Diama border.
General Route:  To St Louis and the Zebrabar - head south towards Rosso leaving the beach early. Meet up with the road route runners outside the American embassy in Nouakchott on the waste land opposite the Petrol station at 09.00/09.30 time to be confirmed. 

THE 20 MINUTE ACTION PLAN STARTS HERE.
Here we have a petrol station and tyre service centre (very loose terms) a shop that sells basic car parts, oil, gearbox oil, belts etc. This is where you try to fix it. 
For everyone else, behind the petrol station is a small convenience store. Water, Fruit, Ice creams are available here. 20 minutes please. The border is still a long way away. This can take 6 or 8 hours to the border and may be 4 hours + for formalities. Buy lots of water for this section. The route through the national park is very rough but highly entertaining. Bare this in mind if you are going to tow a vehicle to the Zebrabar.
On this section from the roundabout to the border we need to be flexible. Those whose cars are working well might get frustrated by the slow pace of those limping along and having to stop every 20 minutes to top up their radiators. This could have been you. It could still be you. By now the heat is getting to the vehicles and belts no matter whether you went the desert or roadway.  Rad weld and K seal have proven to work their magic when this happens. A good team at this point works together and drags the others along with positivity. Radio communication from front of the pack to the back gets us down the road much quicker. Be sure to stop and swap drivers don’t just push on. Stay hydrated.  By the time we reach the national park bumpy stuff some may wish to go off and have a bit of fun. Do remember that others are limping and may need assistance. So either wait up a bit further down the mud track or be prepared to turn back and help. Once we get to the Diama Border we have another opportunity to dump cars with Moulaye.

INTO SENEGAL. 
Important Note - head towards Rosso but DO NOT CROSS AT ROSSO Even if con artists tell you Diama is closed. We will generally be travelling as a group from Nouakchott to the border but if you get lost or delayed I cannot stress enough to you ONLY CROSS AT DIAMA as this is where the Senegal one car pass kicks in. 
Diama:   The route is a mix of tarmac and dirt from Nouakchott, you will see masses of birdlife including pelicans and flamingos, as well as warthogs and crocodiles in the Diwaling National Park you pass through. This is a UNESCO world heritage site.
The road to Senegal via Diama is poor – unbelievably poor. There is a unique smell in the air too. There is tarmac, but just as you get complacent, it runs out and turns into a pitted track, full of gullies and potholes. 
 Dust dust and more dust. Leave enough space so you can see. You need your wits about you and walkie talkies fully charged.  This road is hideous and awesome all at the same time. Much like the desert I doubt you will ever drive on anything like this again. - there are less craters on the moon. It is, however, the best route!  Be prepared, if it is dry, to deviate off the road and drop into the fields alongside where an alternative road has been created.  Buddy up to take this road in wet conditions, as it will be boggy.
You eventually, after 5-7hours of hard driving, cross the Senegal River on a dam (barrage) near the coast.  
The Border Crossing:  Diama v Rosso - both places are difficult crossings, but Rosso is bandit country. If you have gotten to Rosso by a mistake turn around and go to Diama. A 2023 team tried to cross here and got ripped off to the tune of £500 by fake police and still didn’t make it through.

GOOD NEWS. AS OF 2023 WE NOW HAVE A “SENEGAL 1 CAR PASS” CONTRACT IN PLACE.
This is a significant saving on the €250 to pass + €10 Bridge plus €10 stamp + €70 insurance and made-up extras. It will save us not only hours in time but a fortune in costs. However, we now need a minimum number of cars to make this a yearly possibility. The chief at the top of the pyramid is now in control of the bigger car groups and we seem to be able to circumnavigate the 7-year-old rule with this magic 1 car pass. 
Cost as of 2023/ 24/ 25 170 euros per car this includes insurance and a Passavant. This is a major breakthrough.

PLEASE NOTE – This “Senegal 1 car pass” is negotiated as a “Group Rate” so anyone not with the main body may have to do their own negotiations of costs on the day. As such, we really do need to do this border as a single group. 

When we have finished the formalities at the Senegal side you are free to leave and make your way to the Zebrabar. Please bear in mind that some may still need help. So before you disappear make sure you are not needed. It may be to do something quite so simple as to drive in front or behind a limping car with your hazard warning lights on. 

When leaving the border DO NOT follow any sat nav, it will take you down a narrow road on the right-hand side into trees that turns into a mud bath. It you are driving in the dark you won’t know until it’s too late. I had to pull a stranded car out of it last year. Continue straight and only straight until you reach a Y in the road. Then turn right and you will pass some petrol stations and shops. Now put your sat nav on. 

Now you are into Senegal you’ll be tempted to speed because you’ve gone from dirt roads and no tarmac to gorgeous, well-maintained, two full lanes of road.  Be warned that Senegal has the world’s largest speed bumps (really more like launch ramps), frequently with no signage, no paint, and no markings at all.  If you happen to be going 70 mph, about 15 miles into Senegal, you will be air-born over that first speed bump, crash-land really hard, and (if you’re lucky), shaken but otherwise perfectly fine.  Seriously, watch out for the Senegalese speed bumps they are car killers and were not designed to take air bags into consideration. 





ZEBRABAR / SAINT LOUIS

A chilled oasis haven after a sandy few day of madness and mayhem out in the desert. Cold beers, wine, good food on arrival no matter how late we turn up and the bar operates an honesty bar for after hours late ones, more importantly showers. Dave has booked all the cabins. If you were quick enough to sign up to the Dakar Challenge 26 early then you may have bagged a cabin. Not worried about a cabin then camping is available with full use of the facilities. Shower blocks, toilets, I love this place. I have camped and cabin’d. It is a peaceful riverside / sea inlet place of tranquillity set amongst beautiful trees and birdlife. A lovely place to kick back and reflect with those you dug out the sand on just how bonkers your last few weeks have been. It also has ramps to fix battered cars on and a visiting mechanic if needed. The only problem with this place is you won’t want to leave. We arrive here late evening just before dark and have a full rest day here for that very reason.  
Zebrabar is west of the Dakar Road after St Louis, look out for the diamond shaped yellow and black signs near the village of Rao.
Accommodation:  The campsite of Zebrabar, near St Louis, Waypoint N15º 51,85’ W16º 30,71’ European owners Ursula and Martin Durig, will make you welcome.  https://en.zebrabar.net/  
info@zebrabar.net
00221 77 638 18 62

Now get hold of Dave for an introduction to sendwave (we both get 5, 10 or 20 euros for new accounts) This is their only method of payment other than Euros but you have probably run out by now. You must pay in CFA. The Sendwave app works it out for you. You can also use sendwave to clear the bar bill on check out.

From Zebrabar you can hire a canoe / arrange a tour with the owners to see great wildlife like pelicans, cormorants, crabs, green velvet monkeys, kites, hornbills. you are in a national park.  
I stayed in St Louis in 2025. It is a bit expensive and just average. It closes up rather early too. Worth a day visit. It has a colonial French flavour and has a great atmosphere with attractive buildings. It has a lively market and a bridge built by Eiffel.  We recommend the Siki Restaurant near the bridge and a rather eye-opening horse drawn carriage tour of the town to see how the fishermen live. Make sure you get a translator for the best experience. 



The end is in sight. The Dakar challenge must pass through Dakar right?

If you leave the Zebrabar early enough then a run into Dakar is achievable. The road is pretty busy and the city is even more busy but it has a huge beach and plenty of hotels. We don’t like it here, but each to their own. It is also a long journey to the border the next day, which you cannot be late to. Others opt to stay somewhere closer to the border. We stayed in Somone in 2024, Odd place but laid back and pleasant holiday resort. It gave us access to the motorway for our last day run to the border and Sokone in 2025 much further down by the border.

This is it. Give your car a thorough nice talking to. It has gotten you this far. This is the last days drive. The end is in sight, for some a short limp to the end.


TO THE GAMBIA / OUT OF SENEGAL TO BARRA FERRY WAY
It is very important that we all meet and cross the Senegal border TOGETHER all at the same time. 12:00 MIDDAY at the latest. Once again there is paperwork that has been arranged in advance. Dave has the paperwork. This gets tricky as we cannot pass into The Gambia until everyone has been signed out of Senegal. We saved much time and money by getting the Senegal one car pass but this is one of the conditions to circumnavigate the 7-year-old car rule. We pass as a travelling group. These borders are next to each other and they get rather agitated if we block up the car parks or walk from one country to the other in dribs and drabs. 

 WE MUST ALL MEET AT THE KARANG / SENEGAL BORDER AT 12:00 MIDDAY AT THE   LATEST. Factor this into where you stay the night before.

GAMBIA
You’ve made it. Well almost. Again, keep this a bit fluid. 
AT THE TIME OF WRITING (2025) THE BARRA FERRY IS RUNNING SPORADICALLY 
The same as 2024 and 2023. Advice is not to book any hotel after the Zebrabar that cannot be cancelled for free until I know more as we may need to find something towards the bridge. I have been told there will be 2 new ferries in service by the time we are there. But there is a thing called GMT. Gambian Maybe Time.
2025 crossing was not plain sailing and for this reason after leaving the Border you make your own way down to the Ferry booking office and then into the queue for the ferry. My advice is to pile to the front and hope for the best. Expect to wait many, many hours if only 1 ferry is running. To the point that some only just made it on the last ferry of the night even though we had cleared both sides of the Senegal / Gambia border in record time. 

IMPORTANT. Keep back at least 11,000 CFA. Stupidly even though we are in The Gambia foreigners must pay in Senegalese money for the Barra ferry. 


. 





BORDER CROSSING THE BRIDGE

The NON ferry way. Over the bridge 
This is now a long day and we will have to re-route our plans from the Zebrabar or even just before the Senegal border if the ferry becomes out of service. So, I will leave the map below just in case we have to re-route that way. If we do go the Farafeni route, then I will try to get Sam our man in The Gambia to come up and assist our crossing. Either way I will be sending our details in advance to help assist at both crossings.


Feedback from 2018:  For future American challengers: we got charged a visa fee at the Gambian border while everyone from UK and Europe didn’t.  In 2019, it was 65 USD or 60€per person to get an entry visa to The Gambia.

If needed:-
Farafeni Bridge:  As of January 2019, this crossing opened. Said to be closed between 2am and 6am. The diagram below shows how much mileage this puts on against the Banjul Barra ferry route.  
Leaving Senegal: Meet up with Dave. He has paperwork, Park up and head for 2 offices.  In the first, get your passport stamped.  Second is where the car documents are done.  There should be no fees payable. They will try.
Entering Gambia:  Passports are stamped, and photos/fingerprints taken.  Then the car is dealt with.  Dave and Sam have sorted the paperwork for us to pass as a Rotary club group for free. 

Rotary club of The Gambia.
Dave and Sam are working together all year long to make the passing into the Gambia as smooth as possible. You have done a wonderful thing by agreeing to donate your vehicle to the Rotary club charity of The Gambia. 
Please do not go rogue. I know you won’t but sadly I now have to write this after an incident that happened.  2 teams decided to race ahead from the Zebrabar and make it to the border 2 hours ahead of the main group. They passed without the paperwork and balls’ed everything up. I still to this day have no idea what they said. But they had trackers fitted by customs to their vehicles and were meant to report to the police station to have them removed. They didn’t. A week later they were handing over their vehicles to a school outside the customs / Rotary club written agreement. Rather embarrassingly customs turned up and impounded the vehicles and slapped a hefty import tax on these vehicles. I had a 3-way telephone conversation with the irate chief of customs and Sam trying to convince them that this was a one off and should never have happened. As long as we all agree to follow the fragile agreement set out over the last 20 years all will stay good and fun. For now and the future. I thank you for your kind attention on this.






Farafeni Bridge

Before you get to the bridge itself, you will have to pay the toll for crossing 5€ or 2,500CFA.

Barra Ferry crossing: Is at the short bit that says Banjul. We love this crossing its quicker and as we now all have a sense of adventure will appreciate the last bit of madness before it’s all over.  IF FERRY NOT RUNNING head for the border at FARAFENNI it’s about 70km from Kaolack.  The border is easy on the Gambian side but expect the Senegalese customs to try for exit fees (2,000 to 6,000 CFAs).  They won’t like it, but you can just refuse to pay.  The Gambians are great and speak English. Get to either crossing in good time. If you get there too late in the afternoon it may be impossible to catch the ferry or get to the bridge (which now has double traffic as the ferry is not running and get caught up in hours of mayhem). Again, I will advise closer towards our leaving date.



WELCOME TO BANJUL!
Party poppers at the ready. After 4,400 miles you have made it to Banjul...congratulations! 
              . Take a moment to just let it sink in. 4400+/- miles, yes 4400 in that old vehicle from the UK, Germany, Italy, Spain, Latvia, Romania or wherever you started from.  In a so-called old banger deemed to be at the end of its life. Not only that, you, yes you, you’ve taken on some of the most inhospitable terrain on the planet, navigated your way through some of the most trying borders in Africa. Against all the heat and dust. You did it. Amazing. Well done you. Take a bow. Now head to the hotel below for a nice cold well-earned beer.

The Finish line will be arranged for us all to drive under in the daytime on the 6th of February. Time to be announced. Outside the Bakadaji Hotel on the dust track. Then it’s party time / Late lunch and a short speech from the Rotary club to thank you all for your efforts.

Accommodation:  Bakadaji hotel.  This is our recommended finish hotel and is where the “Official Finish Line” will be located – great photo op, so don’t miss it, even if opting to stay elsewhere. Dave & Sam have reserved rooms at the Bakadaji hotel in The Gambia.

Awaiting confirmation of the 2026 price. 

Though you need to confirm that you are with the group. . (2025) £65 for bed and breakfast which is now actually better than last year as it included breakfast! 

Why have we chosen this hotel? Well in 2024 the hotel we had booked - name and shame the Bamboo village resort let us down 3 hours before we arrived and gave all our rooms to the tui flight. Hotel owners in the Gambia can be quite flakey. Even the previous year’s hotel did something similar. Rotary club Sam knows the owner of the Bakadaji hotel and they stepped up at the last minute to save the day. And I’m so glad they did. This place is way better than anything around on its price point ( I went and looked and then came back here and extended my stay ) The rooms are of a very modern standard which exceeds the usual Gambian standards. The car park is safe and manned. The gardens and pool are well kept. Close walking distance to the main strip without being on top of the noise. Out the back gate and close to the beach. I would recommend this place for not only for the first night but the duration of your stay too.
This is also where the cars are handed over. And if you stay at this hotel then a free lift to the airport via Sam and his drivers is available. 

https://bakadajihotel.gm/ 

Whilst this is listed as a 2 star it’s because it was rebuilt recently and hasn’t been re classified. If you check the room rate it’s 150$ a night. So at £65 it was a bargain. What to do next? 

It will require you to contact the hotel to confirm your amount of nights required. 
Email - Info@bakadajihotel.gm 

With Dakar challenge and your surname in the heading and dates required. (We are there from the 5th February 2026 Onwards) put this in the title also along with DOUBLE OR TWIN. So. DAKAR CHALLENGE. TEAM XX / YOUR NAME arrive 05/FEB/26 -depart XX/FEB/26 DOUBLE ROOM. You get the idea, Then a more polite version of this in the message. From what I understand we reserve these rooms now and then pay for them on arrival. Await a response. Take nothing for granted. They might be slow with a reply. Hence making a list on the Facebook page. Then I can follow it up with Rotary club Sam too. Then please go to the DAKAR 26 Facebook page and repeat the above information this time starting the title with your team number. This way I can also make a list too. Don’t know your team number. It’s pinned at the top of the Facebook 26 page. Welcome to your first taster of GMT. Gambian Maybe Time . It will work but just not as efficiently as you are used to. 

.







Things to do if you are spending a few days relaxing before heading home:
Brikarma Craft market and Senegambia Craft Market.
Banjul is worth a wander – there is a great market and you can see how electricity is generated from the offshore ship!
The village Kartong is worth a visit.  About an hour’s drive from Banjul and on the river between Gambia / Senegal.  You will be able to hire a canoe and a guide and see Pelican Island.  There are great parties here in the evening too.
Wildlife:  Gambia has about 175 species of butterfly.  Sadly, the last elephants and chimpanzees disappeared in the early 1900s due to game hunting, but there are still manatees, humpback dolphins, hippos, turtles and pygmy crocs to see
 END USER CHARITES 
Anything you leave in your car will be used, even your old socks. Clothing will be distributed. Your camping equipment and bedding will be given to orphanage schools and the turtle sanctuary. Your tools will be given to an adult education centre. Food goes to the orphanages and homeless. Also if you bring any baby clothes and women’s sanitary wear we will distribute to our chosen charities. Anything surplus will be donated.
Charities we support that get overlooked by the main funded streams.
These are the charities we support but are not limited to.
In no particular order of priority: -
 (1) Crab Island Technical Vocational training centre 
 (2) Organisation for the visually impaired children’s blind school
 (3) Club Foire Women’s skill centre
 (4) Starfish Lamin school farm
 (5) Bakoteh Village (orphanage)
 (6) 1 University scholarship 
 (7) 1 Scholarship for high school
 (8) Medical equipment for Bwaim Hospital
 (9) CETAG Turtle conservation
(10) Brightstar school Old yundum
(11) Bijilo lower basic school boys toilets (continuation from the girl’s toilets that we completed)
 

Visits to see where your funds are being donated to can be arranged and are positively welcomed. 
We also get requests and we do help with all the un promotable stuff. Washing machines for the orphanage, toilet blocks for a nursery & school. Helping with funding for education for teenagers whose parents have died. Artificial turf and rubber underlay for the blind kids playground so they stop hurting themselves when they fall over and much much more. All of this sadly goes under the radar and gets overlooked by the bigger charities. Yet these are the most basic of human requirements or requirements of humanity. It really is most humbling when I get updates throughout the year (all of which I post for you all to see on our Whatsapp group). This really is a “have a lot of fun and make a bit of difference” road challenge and it really sinks in when you see it with your own eyes. So, for this I thank you, As does Minyan from the Rotary club of the Gambia, As does Dahid in Nouakchott (if you finished there) As does all of the people young and old whose lives you will change but never meet. Thank you.

LEAVING YOUR CAR  
Dave and Sam will arrange the handover of your most amazing vehicle. Leave any Senegalese paperwork in your car and also the car V5 if not handed in to Dave or Sam in person.  You are free to keep your car while in the Gambia, however as the car has non local plates and the steering wheel on the wrong side you will get stopped constantly. I would say it’s much easier and more fun to get a local taxi. It helps employ local people and you will get a great conversation out of them. Also please don’t be tempted to just have 1 beer and drive. They are hot on drink driving in The Gambia and it has a zero-tolerance rule. If you are staying on longer than the usual 3, 5 or 7 days please let Dave / Sam know. This is important as the auction needs to be arranged with all cars present. So, the last person out dictates when this date is to be made. Local advertising is set, and local radio and TV announcements are made.
Sam arranges with the customs and airport customs for the vehicle to be waivered at the airport on the way out. 
Also, unless prior arrangements have been made and Sam has been informed, please do not make direct donation of a vehicle to any apparently good cause.  It may be seized by the police/customs who are strict and efficient about such things.  
Vehicle disposal is strictly controlled to ensure that The Dakar Challenge is welcomed by the Gambian authorities in future years and other people can have the experience that you have just enjoyed.  Please don’t do anything to mess things up for future challenges.
Also please do not think I will just drive my car to the airport and leave it in the car park with the keys in. This has caused us all kinds of grief in the past. Impound fees , police drama and the possibility of it being stolen covered in our stickers and causing an accident. That would be the challenge finished for good. 
FLYING HOME. GAMBIA EXPERIENCE DISCOUNT CODE
As you know, you are “totally unsupported”, so now it is time to find your way home! 
We now have a special deal with the Gambia Experience who have regular direct flights out of Banjul. We also have discounts for any friends and family that wish to fly in and stay at one of the many Gambia Experiences hotels too. The flights out of The Gambia are a fixed price minus discount and sell out quickly as they are direct flights back to London. I 
always use these flights as I would rather pay a few quid more and not have the hassle of transiting through another airport. Plus the luggage allowance comes as standard and so does an in-flight meal. Add that to the price of your cheaper flights and its now about equal. Do book up early as the Gambia Experience sells out. All the other carriers are not fixed price and leaving it till the last minute means the price will be about a 3rd more if only days before (and that is if it is available at all) 
The Gambia Experience flights do not get cancelled either. The plane flies London to Gambia only So no delays multi stopping and is a far more pleasant flight time than many others.
 
It is the only DIRECT, daytime flights back to London Gatwick with The Gambia Experience. Monday, Tuesday and Friday flights with Titan Airways in January/February. 5% discount on prices for participants using code 5CHALLENGE – contact our UK office on 01489 866939 to book by 15th October 2024. Flights include 20kg luggage, pre-booked seats and an in-flight light meal. Star Class upgrades and extra legroom seats also available at a supplement. Friends and family offer: 10% off hotel packages in January and February 2025 so you can celebrate with the challengers on arrival, use code 10BJLHOL. Info on a range of hotel options at 
https://www.gambia.co.uk/  Point of contact Karen Gambia Experience.

Banjul flight details at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banjul_International_Airport

AND FINALLY...
We have tried to guide you in this Roadbook, but you are advised to do your own research and liaise with other teams along the route. After all this is just a suggestion made up by travellers of the past. If you see anything that we have missed or spot an error, please let us know. I really hope you have enjoyed seeing this part of the world on a shoestring. By driving through all of these far-flung places you have helped contribute to the pockets of real local people. This truly is the best sort of tourism. How long into the future we will be able to do this, who knows? Combustion engines will soon be a thing of the past. Electric batteries won’t have anywhere near the range required. ULEZ or the Crit zones may open up country wide making the journey unaffordable or simply impassable.
But you did it. Good on ya.

GOOD LUCK AND ENJOY THE RIDE
Have a lot of fun and make a bit of difference
Clemo AKA Dakar Dave.
FICHE
Form to hand out at checkpoints in Morocco/Western Sahara and hotels to save handing over passport
Replace italics in black with your details. 
Marital status:
single: célibataire
married marié
divorced divorcé
separated séparé
For British passport’s place of issue: ‘UKPA’ works fine.
Take lots of copies with you – about 100 for the numerous checkpoints.  Complete in advance to save lots of time and aggravation.
Nom
Surname
Passeport n°
Passport number
Prénoms


Forename
Délivré le
Issue date
Date de naissance


Date of birth
Délivré à
Place of issue
Lieu de naissance
Place of birth
Valide jusqu'à
Expiry date








Nationalité
Britannique
Date d'entrée Maroc
Date of entry
Profession
Occupation
Ville d'entrée
Port of entry




CIN
CIN number
Domicile
Home address












Situation familiale
Marital status
Motif du voyage
Tourisme
Nom du père
Father's name
Marque du véhicule
Vehicle make
Nom de la mère
Mother's name
Immatriculation
Registration Number




